ï»¿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Underwoods, by Robert Louis Stevenson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Underwoods


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson



Release Date: January 27, 2013  [eBook #438]
[This file was first posted on January 3, 1996]


Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDERWOODS***


Transcribed from the 1989 Chatto & Windus edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf





                                UNDERWOODS


                                    BY
                          ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                              NINTH EDITION

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON
                             CHATTO & WINDUS
                                   1898

                                * * * * *

   _Of all my verse_, _like not a single line_;
   _But like my title_, _for it is not mine_.
   _That title from a better man I stole_:
   _Ah_, _how much better_, _had I stolân the whole_!




DEDICATION


THERE are men and classes of men that stand above the common herd: the
soldier, the sailor and the shepherd not unfrequently; the artist rarely;
rarely still, the clergyman; the physician almost as a rule.  He is the
flower (such as it is) of our civilisation; and when that stage of man is
done with, and only remembered to be marvelled at in history, he will be
thought to have shared as little as any in the defects of the period, and
most notably exhibited the virtues of the race.  Generosity he has, such
as is possible to those who practise an art, never to those who drive a
trade; discretion, tested by a hundred secrets; tact, tried in a thousand
embarrassments; and what are more important, Heraclean cheerfulness and
courage.  So it is that he brings air and cheer into the sickroom, and
often enough, though not so often as he wishes, brings healing.

Gratitude is but a lame sentiment; thanks, when they are expressed, are
often more embarrassing than welcome; and yet I must set forth mine to a
few out of many doctors who have brought me comfort and help: to Dr.
Willey of San Francisco, whose kindness to a stranger it must be as
grateful to him, as it is touching to me, to remember; to Dr. Karl Ruedi
of Davos, the good genius of the English in his frosty mountains; to Dr.
Herbert of Paris, whom I knew only for a week, and to Dr. Caissot of
Montpellier, whom I knew only for ten days, and who have yet written
their names deeply in my memory; to Dr. Brandt of Royat; to Dr. Wakefield
of Nice; to Dr. Chepmell, whose visits make it a pleasure to be ill; to
Dr. Horace Dobell, so wise in counsel; to Sir Andrew Clark, so unwearied
in kindness and to that wise youth, my uncle, Dr. Balfour.

I forget as many as I remember; and I ask both to pardon me, these for
silence, those for inadequate speech.  But one name I have kept on
purpose to the last, because it is a household word with me, and because
if I had not received favours from so many hands and in so many quarters
of the world, it should have stood upon this page alone: that of my
friend Thomas Bodley Scott of Bournemouth.  Will he accept this, although
shared among so many, for a dedication to himself? and when next my
ill-fortune (which has thus its pleasant side) brings him hurrying to me
when he would fain sit down to meat or lie down to rest, will he care to
remember that he takes this trouble for one who is not fool enough to be
ungrateful?

                                                                  R. L. S.

SKERRYVORE,
         BOURNEMOUTH.




NOTE


THE human conscience has fled of late the troublesome domain of conduct
for what I should have supposed to be the less congenial field of art:
there she may now be said to rage, and with special severity in all that
touches dialect; so that in every novel the letters of the alphabet are
tortured, and the reader wearied, to commemorate shades of
mis-pronunciation.  Now spelling is an art of great difficulty in my
eyes, and I am inclined to lean upon the printer, even in common
practice, rather than to venture abroad upon new quests.  And the Scots
tongue has an orthography of its own, lacking neither âauthority nor
author.â  Yet the temptation is great to lend a little guidance to the
bewildered Englishman.  Some simple phonetic artifice might defend your
verses from barbarous mishandling, and yet not injure any vested
interest.  So it seems at first; but there are rocks ahead.  Thus, if I
wish the diphthong _ou_ to have its proper value, I may write _oor_
instead of _our_; many have done so and lived, and the pillars of the
universe remained unshaken.  But if I did so, and came presently to
_doun_, which is the classical Scots spelling of the English _down_, I
should begin to feel uneasy; and if I went on a little farther, and came
to a classical Scots word, like _stour_ or _dour_ or _clour_, I should
know precisely where I wasâthat is to say, that I was out of sight of
land on those high seas of spelling reform in which so many strong
swimmers have toiled vainly.  To some the situation is exhilarating; as
for me, I give one bubbling cry and sink.  The compromise at which I have
arrived is indefensible, and I have no thought of trying to defend it.
As I have stuck for the most part to the proper spelling, I append a
table of some common vowel sounds which no one need consult; and just to
prove that I belong to my age and have in me the stuff of a reformer, I
have used modification marks throughout.  Thus I can tell myself, not
without pride, that I have added a fresh stumbling-block for English
readers, and to a page of print in my native tongue, have lent a new
uncouthness.  _Sed non nobis_.

I note again, that among our new dialecticians, the local habitat of
every dialect is given to the square mile.  I could not emulate this
nicety if I desired; for I simply wrote my Scots as well as I was able,
not caring if it hailed from Lauderdale or Angus, from the Mearns or
Galloway; if I had ever heard a good word, I used it without shame; and
when Scots was lacking, or the rhyme jibbed, I was glad (like my betters)
to fall back on English.  For all that, I own to a friendly feeling for
the tongue of Fergusson and of Sir Walter, both Edinburgh men; and I
confess that Burns has always sounded in my ear like something partly
foreign.  And indeed I am from the Lothians myself; it is there I heard
the language spoken about my childhood; and it is in the drawling Lothian
voice that I repeat it to myself.  Let the precisians call my speech that
of the Lothians.  And if it be not pure, alas! what matters it?  The day
draws near when this illustrious and malleable tongue shall be quite
forgotten; and Burnâs Ayrshire, and Dr. Macdonaldâs Aberdeen-awaâ, and
Scottâs brave, metropolitan utterance will be all equally the ghosts of
speech.  Till then I would love to have my hour as a native Maker, and be
read by my own countryfolk in our own dying language: an ambition surely
rather of the heart than of the head, so restricted as it is in prospect
of endurance, so parochial in bounds of space.




CONTENTS

                           BOOK I.â_In English_
                                                                  PAGE
           I.  ENVOYâGo, little book                                 1
          II.  A SONG OF THE ROADâThe gauger walked                  2
         III.  THE CANOE SPEAKSâOn the great streams                 4
          IV.  It is the season                                      7
           V.  THE HOUSE BEAUTIFULâA naked house, a naked            9
               moor
          VI.  A VISIT FROM THE SEAâFar from the loud sea           12
               beaches
         VII.  TO A GARDENERâFriend, in my mountain-side            14
               demesne
        VIII.  TO MINNIEâA picture frame for you to fill            16
          IX.  TO K. DE M.âA lover of the moorland bare             17
           X.  TO N. V. DE G. S.âThe unfathomable sea               19
          XI.  TO WILL. H. LOWâYouth now flees                      21
         XII.  TO MRS. WILL. H. LOWâEven in the bluest              24
               noonday of July
        XIII.  TO H. F. BROWNâI sit and wait                        26
         XIV.  TO ANDREW LANGâDear Andrew                           29
          XV.  ET TU IN ARCADIA VIXISTIâIn ancient tales,           31
               O friend
         XVI.  TO W. E. HENLEYâThe year runs through her            36
               phases
        XVII.  HENRY JAMESâWho comes to-night                       38
       XVIII.  THE MIRROR SPEAKSâWhere the bells                    39
         XIX.  KATHARINEâWe see you as we see a face                41
          XX.  TO F. J. S.âI read, dear friend                      42
         XXI.  REQUIEMâUnder the wide and starry sky                43
        XXII.  THE CELESTIAL SURGEONâIf I have faltered             44
       XXIII.  OUR LADY OF THE SNOWSâOut of the sun                 45
        XXIV.  Not yet, my soul                                     50
         XXV.  It is not yours, O mother, to complain               53
        XXVI.  THE SICK CHILDâO mother, lay your hand on            56
               my brow
       XXVII.  IN MEMORIAM F. A. S.âYet, O stricken heart           58
      XXVIII.  TO MY FATHERâPeace and her huge invasion             60
        XXIX.  IN THE STATESâWith half a heart                      62
         XXX.  A PORTRAITâI am a kind of farthing dip               63
        XXXI.  Sing clearlier, Muse                                 65
       XXXII.  A CAMPâThe bed was made                              66
      XXXIII.  THE COUNTRY OF THE CAMISARDSâWe travelled            67
               in the print of olden wars
       XXXIV.  SKERRYVOREâFor love of lovely words                  68
        XXXV.  SKERRYVORE: THE PARALLELâHere all is sunny           69
       XXXVI.  My house, I say                                      70
      XXXVII.  My body which my dungeon is                          71
     XXXVIII.  Say not of me that weakly I declined                 73
                         BOOK II.â_In Scots_
           I.  THE MAKER TO POSTERITYâFar âyont amang the           77
               years to be
          II.  ILLE TERRARUMâFrae nirly, nippinâ, Easâlanâ          80
               breeze
         III.  When aince Aprile has fairly come                    85
          IV.  A MILE ANâ A BITTOCK                                 87
           V.  A LOWDEN SABBATH MORNâThe clinkum-clank oâ           89
               Sabbath bells
          VI.  THE SPAEWIFEâO, I wad like to ken                    98
         VII.  THE BLASTâ1875âItâs raininâ.  Weetâs the            100
               gairden sod
        VIII.  THE COUNTERBLASTâ1886âMy bonny man, the             103
               warld, itâs true
          IX.  THE COUNTERBLAST IRONICALâItâs strange that         108
               God should fash to frame
           X.  THEIR LAUREATE TO AN ACADEMY CLASS DINNER           110
               CLUBâDear Thamson class, whaureâer I gang
          XI.  EMBRO HIE KIRKâThe Lord Himselâ in former           114
               days
         XII.  THE SCOTSMANâS RETURN FROM ABROADâIn mony a         118
               foreign pairt Iâve been
        XIII.  Late in the nicht                                   125
         XIV.  MY CONSCIENCE!âOf aâ the ills that flesh            130
               can fear
          XV.  TO DOCTOR JOHN BROWNâBy Lyne and Tyne, by           133
               Thames and Tees
         XVI.  Itâs an owercome sooth for age anâ youth            138

BOOK I.â_In English_


IâENVOY


   GO, little book, and wish to all
   Flowers in the garden, meat in the hall,
   A bin of wine, a spice of wit,
   A house with lawns enclosing it,
   A living river by the door,
   A nightingale in the sycamore!



IIâA SONG OF THE ROAD


   THE gauger walked with willing foot,
   And aye the gauger played the flute;
   And what should Master Gauger play
   But _Over the hills and far away_?

   Wheneâer I buckle on my pack
   And foot it gaily in the track,
   O pleasant gauger, long since dead,
   I hear you fluting on ahead.

   You go with me the self-same wayâ
   The self-same air for me you play;
   For I do think and so do you
   It is the tune to travel to.

   For who would gravely set his face
   To go to this or tâother place?
   Thereâs nothing under Heavân so blue
   Thatâs fairly worth the travelling to.

   On every hand the roads begin,
   And people walk with zeal therein;
   But wheresoeâer the highways tend,
   Be sure thereâs nothing at the end.

   Then follow you, wherever hie
   The travelling mountains of the sky.
   Or let the streams in civil mode
   Direct your choice upon a road;

   For one and all, or high or low,
   Will lead you where you wish to go;
   And one and all go night and day
   _Over the hills and far away_!

_Forest of Montargis_, 1878.



IIIâTHE CANOE SPEAKS


   ON the great streams the ships may go
   About menâs business to and fro.
   But I, the egg-shell pinnace, sleep
   On crystal waters ankle-deep:
   I, whose diminutive design,
   Of sweeter cedar, pithier pine,
   Is fashioned on so frail a mould,
   A hand may launch, a hand withhold:
   I, rather, with the leaping trout
   Wind, among lilies, in and out;
   I, the unnamed, inviolate,
   Green, rustic rivers, navigate;
   My dipping paddle scarcely shakes
   The berry in the bramble-brakes;
   Still forth on my green way I wend
   Beside the cottage garden-end;
   And by the nested angler fare,
   And take the lovers unaware.
   By willow wood and water-wheel
   Speedily fleets my touching keel;
   By all retired and shady spots
   Where prosper dim forget-me-nots;
   By meadows where at afternoon
   The growing maidens troop in June
   To loose their girdles on the grass.
   Ah! speedier than before the glass
   The backward toilet goes; and swift
   As swallows quiver, robe and shift
   And the rough country stockings lie
   Around each young divinity.
   When, following the recondite brook,
   Sudden upon this scene I look,
   And light with unfamiliar face
   On chaste Dianaâs bathing-place,
   Loud ring the hills about and all
   The shallows are abandoned. . . .



IV


   IT is the season now to go
   About the country high and low,
   Among the lilacs hand in hand,
   And two by two in fairy land.

   The brooding boy, the sighing maid,
   Wholly fain and half afraid,
   Now meet along the hazelâd brook
   To pass and linger, pause and look.

   A year ago, and blithely paired,
   Their rough-and-tumble play they shared;
   They kissed and quarrelled, laughed and cried,
   A year ago at Eastertide.

   With bursting heart, with fiery face,
   She strove against him in the race;
   He unabashed her garter saw,
   That now would touch her skirts with awe.

   Now by the stile ablaze she stops,
   And his demurer eyes he drops;
   Now they exchange averted sighs
   Or stand and marry silent eyes.

   And he to her a hero is
   And sweeter she than primroses;
   Their common silence dearer far
   Than nightingale and mavis are.

   Now when they sever wedded hands,
   Joy trembles in their bosom-strands
   And lovely laughter leaps and falls
   Upon their lips in madrigals.



VâTHE HOUSE BEAUTIFUL


   _A naked house_, _a naked moor_,
   _A shivering pool before the door_,
   _A garden bare of flowers and fruit_
   _And poplars at the garden foot_:
   _Such is the place that I live in_,
   _Bleak without and bare within_.

   Yet shall your ragged moor receive
   The incomparable pomp of eve,
   And the cold glories of the dawn
   Behind your shivering trees be drawn;
   And when the wind from place to place
   Doth the unmoored cloud-galleons chase,
   Your garden gloom and gleam again,
   With leaping sun, with glancing rain.
   Here shall the wizard moon ascend
   The heavens, in the crimson end
   Of dayâs declining splendour; here
   The army of the stars appear.
   The neighbour hollows dry or wet,
   Spring shall with tender flowers beset;
   And oft the morning muser see
   Larks rising from the broomy lea,
   And every fairy wheel and thread
   Of cobweb dew-bediamonded.
   When daisies go, shall winter time
   Silver the simple grass with rime;
   Autumnal frosts enchant the pool
   And make the cart-ruts beautiful;
   And when snow-bright the moor expands,
   How shall your children clap their hands!
   To make this earth our hermitage,
   A cheerful and a changeful page,
   Godâs bright and intricate device
   Of days and seasons doth suffice.



VIâA VISIT FROM THE SEA


   FAR from the loud sea beaches
      Where he goes fishing and crying,
   Here in the inland garden
      Why is the sea-gull flying?

   Here are no fish to dive for;
      Here is the corn and lea;
   Here are the green trees rustling.
      Hie away home to sea!

   Fresh is the river water
      And quiet among the rushes;
   This is no home for the sea-gull
      But for the rooks and thrushes.

   Pity the bird that has wandered!
      Pity the sailor ashore!
   Hurry him home to the ocean,
      Let him come here no more!

   High on the sea-cliff ledges
      The white gulls are trooping and crying,
   Here among the rooks and roses,
      Why is the sea-gull flying?



VIIâTO A GARDENER


   FRIEND, in my mountain-side demesne
   My plain-beholding, rosy, green
   And linnet-haunted garden-ground,
   Let still the esculents abound.
   Let first the onion flourish there,
   Rose among roots, the maiden-fair,
   Wine-scented and poetic soul
   Of the capacious salad bowl.
   Let thyme the mountaineer (to dress
   The tinier birds) and wading cress,
   The lover of the shallow brook,
   From all my plots and borders look.

   Nor crisp and ruddy radish, nor
   Pease-cods for the childâs pinafore
   Be lacking; nor of salad clan
   The last and least that ever ran
   About great natureâs garden-beds.
   Nor thence be missed the speary heads
   Of artichoke; nor thence the bean
   That gathered innocent and green
   Outsavours the belauded pea.

   These tend, I prithee; and for me,
   Thy most long-suffering master, bring
   In April, when the linnets sing
   And the days lengthen more and more
   At sundown to the garden door.
   And I, being provided thus.
   Shall, with superb asparagus,
   A book, a taper, and a cup
   Of country wine, divinely sup.

_La Solitude_, _HyÃ¨res_.



VIIIâTO MINNIE


                           (With a hand-glass)

   A PICTURE-FRAME for you to fill,
      A paltry setting for your face,
   A thing that has no worth until
      You lend it something of your grace

   I send (unhappy I that sing
      Laid by awhile upon the shelf)
   Because I would not send a thing
      Less charming than you are yourself.

   And happier than I, alas!
      (Dumb thing, I envy its delight)
   âTwill wish you well, the looking-glass,
      And look you in the face to-night.

1869.



IXâTO K. DE M.


   A LOVER of the moorland bare
   And honest country winds, you were;
   The silver-skimming rain you took;
   And loved the floodings of the brook,
   Dew, frost and mountains, fire and seas,
   Tumultuary silences,
   Winds that in darkness fifed a tune,
   And the high-riding, virgin moon.

   And as the berry, pale and sharp,
   Springs on some ditchâs counterscarp
   In our ungenial, native northâ
   You put your frosted wildings forth,
   And on the heath, afar from man,
   A strong and bitter virgin ran.

   The berry ripened keeps the rude
   And racy flavour of the wood.
   And you that loved the empty plain
   All redolent of wind and rain,
   Around you still the curlew singsâ
   The freshness of the weather clingsâ
   The maiden jewels of the rain
   Sit in your dabbled locks again.



XâTO N. V. DE G. S.


   THE unfathomable sea, and time, and tears,
   The deeds of heroes and the crimes of kings
   Dispart us; and the river of events
   Has, for an age of years, to east and west
   More widely borne our cradles.  Thou to me
   Art foreign, as when seamen at the dawn
   Descry a land far off and know not which.
   So I approach uncertain; so I cruise
   Round thy mysterious islet, and behold
   Surf and great mountains and loud river-bars,
   And from the shore hear inland voices call.

   Strange is the seamanâs heart; he hopes, he fears;
   Draws closer and sweeps wider from that coast;
   Last, his rent sail refits, and to the deep
   His shattered prow uncomforted puts back.
   Yet as he goes he ponders at the helm
   Of that bright island; where he feared to touch,
   His spirit readventures; and for years,
   Where by his wife he slumbers safe at home,
   Thoughts of that land revisit him; he sees
   The eternal mountains beckon, and awakes
   Yearning for that far home that might have been.



XIâTO WILL. H. LOW


   YOUTH now flees on feathered foot
   Faint and fainter sounds the flute,
   Rarer songs of gods; and still
   Somewhere on the sunny hill,
   Or along the winding stream,
   Through the willows, flits a dream;
   Flits but shows a smiling face,
   Flees but with so quaint a grace,
   None can choose to stay at home,
   All must follow, all must roam.

   This is unborn beauty: she
   Now in air floats high and free,
   Takes the sun and breaks the blue;â
   Late with stooping pinion flew
   Raking hedgerow trees, and wet
   Her wing in silver streams, and set
   Shining foot on temple roof:
   Now again she flies aloof,
   Coasting mountain clouds and kissât
   By the eveningâs amethyst.

   In wet wood and miry lane,
   Still we pant and pound in vain;
   Still with leaden foot we chase
   Waning pinion, fainting face;
   Still with gray hair we stumble on,
   Till, behold, the vision gone!

   Where hath fleeting beauty led?
   To the doorway of the dead.
   Life is over, life was gay:
   We have come the primrose way.



XIIâTO MRS. WILL. H. LOW


   EVEN in the bluest noonday of July,
   There could not run the smallest breath of wind
   But all the quarter sounded like a wood;
   And in the chequered silence and above
   The hum of city cabs that sought the Bois,
   Suburban ashes shivered into song.
   A patter and a chatter and a chirp
   And a long dying hissâit was as though
   Starched old brocaded dames through all the house
   Had trailed a strident skirt, or the whole sky
   Even in a wink had over-brimmed in rain.

   Hark, in these shady parlours, how it talks
   Of the near Autumn, how the smitten ash
   Trembles and augurs floods!  O not too long
   In these inconstant latitudes delay,
   O not too late from the unbeloved north
   Trim your escape!  For soon shall this low roof
   Resound indeed with rain, soon shall your eyes
   Search the foul garden, search the darkened rooms,
   Nor find one jewel but the blazing log.

12 _Rue Vernier_, _Paris_.



XIIIâTO H. F. BROWN


                  (Written during a dangerous sickness.)

   I SIT and wait a pair of oars
   On cis-Elysian river-shores.
   Where the immortal dead have sate,
   âTis mine to sit and meditate;
   To re-ascend lifeâs rivulet,
   Without remorse, without regret;
   And sing my _Alma Genetrix_
   Among the willows of the Styx.

   And lo, as my serener soul
   Did these unhappy shores patrol,
   And wait with an attentive ear
   The coming of the gondolier,
   Your fire-surviving roll I took,
   Your spirited and happy book; {27}
   Whereon, despite my frowning fate,
   It did my soul so recreate
   That all my fancies fled away
   On a Venetian holiday.

   Now, thanks to your triumphant care,
   Your pages clear as April air,
   The sails, the bells, the birds, I know,
   And the far-off Friulan snow;
   The land and sea, the sun and shade,
   And the blue even lamp-inlaid.
   For this, for these, for all, O friend,
   For your whole book from end to endâ
   For Paron Pieroâs muttonhamâ
   I your defaulting debtor am.

   Perchance, reviving, yet may I
   To your sea-paven city hie,
   And in a _felze_, some day yet
   Light at your pipe my cigarette.



XIVâTO ANDREW LANG


   DEAR Andrew, with the brindled hair,
   Who glory to have thrown in air,
   High over arm, the trembling reed,
   By Ale and Kail, by Till and Tweed:
   An equal craft of hand you show
   The pen to guide, the fly to throw:
   I count you happy starred; for God,
   When He with inkpot and with rod
   Endowed you, bade your fortune lead
   Forever by the crooks of Tweed,
   Forever by the woods of song
   And lands that to the Muse belong;
   Or if in peopled streets, or in
   The abhorred pedantic sanhedrim,
   It should be yours to wander, still
   Airs of the morn, airs of the hill,
   The plovery Forest and the seas
   That break about the Hebrides,
   Should follow over field and plain
   And find you at the window pane;
   And you again see hill and peel,
   And the bright springs gush at your heel.
   So went the fiat forth, and so
   Garrulous like a brook you go,
   With sound of happy mirth and sheen
   Of daylightâwhether by the green
   You fare that moment, or the gray;
   Whether you dwell in March or May;
   Or whether treat of reels and rods
   Or of the old unhappy gods:
   Still like a brook your page has shone,
   And your ink sings of Helicon.



XVâET TU IN ARCADIA VIXISTI


                             (TO R. A. M. S.)

   IN ancient tales, O friend, thy spirit dwelt;
   There, from of old, thy childhood passed; and there
   High expectation, high delights and deeds,
   Thy fluttering heart with hope and terror moved.
   And thou hast heard of yore the Blatant Beast,
   And Rolandâs horn, and that war-scattering shout
   Of all-unarmed Achilles, Ã¦gis-crowned
   And perilous lands thou sawest, sounding shores
   And seas and forests drear, island and dale
   And mountain dark.  For thou with Tristram rodâst
   Or Bedevere, in farthest Lyonesse.

   Thou hadst a booth in Samarcand, whereat
   Side-looking Magians trafficked; thence, by night,
   An Afreet snatched thee, and with wings upbore
   Beyond the Aral mount; or, hoping gain,
   Thou, with a jar of money, didst embark,
   For Balsorah, by sea.  But chiefly thou
   In that clear air tookâst life; in Arcady
   The haunted, land of song; and by the wells
   Where most the gods frequent.  There Chiron old,
   In the Pelethronian antre, taught thee lore:
   The plants, he taught, and by the shining stars
   In forests dim to steer.  There hast thou seen
   Immortal Pan dance secret in a glade,
   And, dancing, roll his eyes; these, where they fell,
   Shed glee, and through the congregated oaks
   A flying horror winged; while all the earth
   To the godâs pregnant footing thrilled within.
   Or whiles, beside the sobbing stream, he breathed,
   In his clutched pipe unformed and wizard strains
   Divine yet brutal; which the forest heard,
   And thou, with awe; and far upon the plain
   The unthinking ploughman started and gave ear.

   Now things there are that, upon him who sees,
   A strong vocation lay; and strains there are
   That whoso hears shall hear for evermore.
   For evermore thou hearâst immortal Pan
   And those melodious godheads, ever young
   And ever quiring, on the mountains old.

   What was this earth, child of the gods, to thee?
   Forth from thy dreamland thou, a dreamer, camâst
   And in thine ears the olden music rang,
   And in thy mind the doings of the dead,
   And those heroic ages long forgot.
   To a so fallen earth, alas! too late,
   Alas! in evil days, thy steps return,
   To list at noon for nightingales, to grow
   A dweller on the beach till Argo come
   That came long since, a lingerer by the pool
   Where that desirÃ¨d angel bathes no more.

   As when the Indian to Dakota comes,
   Or farthest Idaho, and where he dwelt,
   He with his clan, a humming city finds;
   Thereon awhile, amazed, he stares, and then
   To right and leftward, like a questing dog,
   Seeks first the ancestral altars, then the hearth
   Long cold with rains, and where old terror lodged,
   And where the dead.  So thee undying Hope,
   With all her pack, hunts screaming through the years:
   Here, there, thou fleeÃ«st; but nor here nor there
   The pleasant gods abide, the glory dwells.

   That, that was not Apollo, not the god.
   This was not Venus, though she Venus seemed
   A moment.  And though fair yon river move,
   She, all the way, from disenchanted fount
   To seas unhallowed runs; the gods forsook
   Long since her trembling rushes; from her plains
   Disconsolate, long since adventure fled;
   And now although the inviting river flows,
   And every poplared cape, and every bend
   Or willowy islet, win upon thy soul
   And to thy hopeful shallop whisper speed;
   Yet hope not thou at all; hope is no more;
   And O, long since the golden groves are dead
   The faery cities vanished from the land!



XVIâTO W. E. HENLEY


   THE year runs through her phases; rain and sun,
   Springtime and summer pass; winter succeeds;
   But one pale season rules the house of death.
   Cold falls the imprisoned daylight; fell disease
   By each lean pallet squats, and pain and sleep
   Toss gaping on the pillows.
               But O thou!
   Uprise and take thy pipe.  Bid music flow,
   Strains by good thoughts attended, like the spring
   The swallows follow over land and sea.
   Pain sleeps at once; at once, with open eyes,
   Dozing despair awakes.  The shepherd sees
   His flock come bleating home; the seaman hears
   Once more the cordage rattle.  Airs of home!
   Youth, love and roses blossom; the gaunt ward
   Dislimns and disappears, and, opening out,
   Shows brooks and forests, and the blue beyond
   Of mountains.
               Small the pipe; but oh! do thou,
   Peak-faced and suffering piper, blow therein
   The dirge of heroes dead; and to these sick,
   These dying, sound the triumph over death.
   Behold! each greatly breathes; each tastes a joy
   Unknown before, in dying; for each knows
   A hero dies with himâthough unfulfilled,
   Yet conquering trulyâand not dies in vain

   So is pain cheered, death comforted; the house
   Of sorrow smiles to listen.  Once againâ
   O thou, Orpheus and Heracles, the bard
   And the deliverer, touch the stops again!



XVIIâHENRY JAMES


   WHO comes to-night?  We ope the doors in vain.
   Who comes?  My bursting walls, can you contain
   The presences that now together throng
   Your narrow entry, as with flowers and song,
   As with the air of life, the breath of talk?
   Lo, how these fair immaculate women walk
   Behind their jocund maker; and we see
   Slighted _De Mauves_, and that far different she,
   _Gressie_, the trivial sphynx; and to our feast
   _Daisy_ and _Barb_ and _Chancellor_ (she not least!)
   With all their silken, all their airy kin,
   Do like unbidden angels enter in.
   But he, attended by these shining names,
   Comes (best of all) himselfâour welcome James.



XVIIIâTHE MIRROR SPEAKS


   WHERE the bells peal far at sea
   Cunning fingers fashioned me.
   There on palace walls I hung
   While that Consuelo sung;
   But I heard, though I listened well,
   Never a note, never a trill,
   Never a beat of the chiming bell.
   There I hung and looked, and there
   In my gray face, faces fair
   Shone from under shining hair.
   Well I saw the poising head,
   But the lips moved and nothing said;
   And when lights were in the hall,
   Silent moved the dancers all.

   So awhile I glowed, and then
   Fell on dusty days and men;
   Long I slumbered packed in straw,
   Long I none but dealers saw;
   Till before my silent eye
   One that sees came passing by.

   Now with an outlandish grace,
   To the sparkling fire I face
   In the blue room at Skerryvore;
   Where I wait until the door
   Open, and the Prince of Men,
   Henry James, shall come again.



XIXâKATHARINE


   WE see you as we see a face
   That trembles in a forest place
   Upon the mirror of a pool
   Forever quiet, clear and cool;
   And in the wayward glass, appears
   To hover between smiles and tears,
   Elfin and human, airy and true,
   And backed by the reflected blue.



XXâTO F. J. S.


   I READ, dear friend, in your dear face
   Your lifeâs tale told with perfect grace;
   The river of your life, I trace
   Up the sun-chequered, devious bed
   To the far-distant fountain-head.

   Not one quick beat of your warm heart,
   Nor thought that came to you apart,
   Pleasure nor pity, love nor pain
   Nor sorrow, has gone by in vain;

   But as some lone, wood-wandering child
   Brings home with him at evening mild
   The thorns and flowers of all the wild,
   From your whole life, O fair and true
   Your flowers and thorns you bring with you!



XXIâREQUIEM


   UNDER the wide and starry sky,
   Dig the grave and let me lie.
   Glad did I live and gladly die,
      And I laid me down with a will.

   This be the verse you grave for me:
   _Here he lies where he longed to be_;
   _Home is the sailor_, _home from sea_,
      _And the hunter home from the hill_.



XXIIâTHE CELESTIAL SURGEON


   IF I have faltered more or less
   In my great task of happiness;
   If I have moved among my race
   And shown no glorious morning face;
   If beams from happy human eyes
   Have moved me not; if morning skies,
   Books, and my food, and summer rain
   Knocked on my sullen heart in vain:â
   Lord, thy most pointed pleasure take
   And stab my spirit broad awake;
   Or, Lord, if too obdurate I,
   Choose thou, before that spirit die,
   A piercing pain, a killing sin,
   And to my dead heart run them in!



XXIIIâOUR LADY OF THE SNOWS


   OUT of the sun, out of the blast,
   Out of the world, alone I passed
   Across the moor and through the wood
   To where the monastery stood.
   There neither lute nor breathing fife,
   Nor rumour of the world of life,
   Nor confidences low and dear,
   Shall strike the meditative ear.
   Aloof, unhelpful, and unkind,
   The prisoners of the iron mind,
   Where nothing speaks except the hell
   The unfraternal brothers dwell.

   Poor passionate men, still clothed afresh
   With agonising folds of flesh;
   Whom the clear eyes solicit still
   To some bold output of the will,
   While fairy Fancy far before
   And musing Memory-Hold-the-door
   Now to heroic death invite
   And now uncurtain fresh delight:
   O, little boots it thus to dwell
   On the remote unneighboured hill!

   O to be up and doing, O
   Unfearing and unshamed to go
   In all the uproar and the press
   About my human business!
   My undissuaded heart I hear
   Whisper courage in my ear.
   With voiceless calls, the ancient earth
   Summons me to a daily birth.

   Thou, O my love, ye, O my friendsâ
   The gist of life, the end of endsâ
   To laugh, to love, to live, to die,
   Ye call me by the ear and eye!

   Forth from the casemate, on the plain
   Where honour has the world to gain,
   Pour forth and bravely do your part,
   O knights of the unshielded heart!
   Forth and forever forward!âout
   From prudent turret and redoubt,
   And in the mellay charge amain,
   To fall but yet to rise again!
   Captive? ah, still, to honour bright,
   A captive soldier of the right!
   Or free and fighting, good with ill?
   Unconquering but unconquered still!

   And ye, O brethren, what if God,
   When from Heavânâs top he spies abroad,
   And sees on this tormented stage
   The noble war of mankind rage:
   What if his vivifying eye,
   O monks, should pass your corner by?
   For still the Lord is Lord of might;
   In deeds, in deeds, he takes delight;
   The plough, the spear, the laden barks,
   The field, the founded city, marks;
   He marks the smiler of the streets,
   The singer upon garden seats;
   He sees the climber in the rocks:
   To him, the shepherd folds his flocks.
   For those he loves that underprop
   With daily virtues Heavenâs top,
   And bear the falling sky with ease,
   Unfrowning caryatides.
   Those he approves that ply the trade,
   That rock the child, that wed the maid,
   That with weak virtues, weaker hands,
   Sow gladness on the peopled lands,
   And still with laughter, song and shout,
   Spin the great wheel of earth about.

   But ye?âO ye who linger still
   Here in your fortress on the hill,
   With placid face, with tranquil breath,
   The unsought volunteers of death,
   Our cheerful General on high
   With careless looks may pass you by.



XXIV


   NOT yet, my soul, these friendly fields desert,
   Where thou with grass, and rivers, and the breeze,
   And the bright face of day, thy dalliance hadst;
   Where to thine ear first sang the enraptured birds;
   Where love and thou that lasting bargain made.
   The ship rides trimmed, and from the eternal shore
   Thou hearest airy voices; but not yet
   Depart, my soul, not yet awhile depart.

   Freedom is far, rest far.  Thou art with life
   Too closely woven, nerve with nerve intwined;
   Service still craving service, love for love,
   Love for dear love, still suppliant with tears.
   Alas, not yet thy human task is done!
   A bond at birth is forged; a debt doth lie
   Immortal on mortality.  It growsâ
   By vast rebound it grows, unceasing growth;
   Gift upon gift, alms upon alms, upreared,
   From man, from God, from nature, till the soul
   At that so huge indulgence stands amazed.

   Leave not, my soul, the unfoughten field, nor leave
   Thy debts dishonoured, nor thy place desert
   Without due service rendered.  For thy life,
   Up, spirit, and defend that fort of clay,
   Thy body, now beleaguered; whether soon
   Or late she fall; whether to-day thy friends
   Bewail thee dead, or, after years, a man
   Grown old in honour and the friend of peace.
   Contend, my soul, for moments and for hours;
   Each is with service pregnant; each reclaimed
   Is as a kingdom conquered, where to reign.

   As when a captain rallies to the fight
   His scattered legions, and beats ruin back,
   He, on the field, encamps, well pleased in mind.
   Yet surely him shall fortune overtake,
   Him smite in turn, headlong his ensigns drive;
   And that dear land, now safe, to-morrow fall.
   But he, unthinking, in the present good
   Solely delights, and all the camps rejoice.



XXV


   IT is not yours, O mother, to complain,
   Not, mother, yours to weep,
   Though nevermore your son again
   Shall to your bosom creep,
   Though nevermore again you watch your baby sleep.

   Though in the greener paths of earth,
   Mother and child, no more
   We wander; and no more the birth
   Of me whom once you bore,
   Seems still the brave reward that once it seemed of yore;

   Though as all passes, day and night,
   The seasons and the years,
   From you, O mother, this delight,
   This also disappearsâ
   Some profit yet survives of all your pangs and tears.

   The child, the seed, the grain of corn,
   The acorn on the hill,
   Each for some separate end is born
   In season fit, and still
   Each must in strength arise to work the almighty will.

   So from the hearth the children flee,
   By that almighty hand
   Austerely led; so one by sea
   Goes forth, and one by land;
   Nor aught of all manâs sons escapes from that command

   So from the sally each obeys
   The unseen almighty nod;
   So till the ending all their ways
   Blindfolded loth have trod:
   Nor knew their task at all, but were the tools of God.

   And as the fervent smith of yore
   Beat out the glowing blade,
   Nor wielded in the front of war
   The weapons that he made,
   But in the tower at home still plied his ringing trade;

   So like a sword the son shall roam
   On nobler missions sent;
   And as the smith remained at home
   In peaceful turret pent,
   So sits the while at home the mother well content.



XXVIâTHE SICK CHILD


   _Child_.  O MOTHER, lay your hand on my brow!
   O mother, mother, where am I now?
   Why is the room so gaunt and great?
   Why am I lying awake so late?

   _Mother_.  Fear not at all: the night is still.
   Nothing is here that means you illâ
   Nothing but lamps the whole town through,
   And never a child awake but you.

   _Child_.  Mother, mother, speak low in my ear,
   Some of the things are so great and near,
   Some are so small and far away,
   I have a fear that I cannot say,
   What have I done, and what do I fear,
   And why are you crying, mother dear?

   _Mother_.  Out in the city, sounds begin
   Thank the kind God, the carts come in!
   An hour or two more, and God is so kind,
   The day shall be blue in the window-blind,
   Then shall my child go sweetly asleep,
   And dream of the birds and the hills of sheep.



XXVIIâIN MEMORIAM F. A. S.


   YET, O stricken heart, remember, O remember
      How of human days he lived the better part.
   April came to bloom and never dim December
      Breathed its killing chills upon the head or heart.

   Doomed to know not Winter, only Spring, a being
      Trod the flowery April blithely for a while,
   Took his fill of music, joy of thought and seeing,
      Came and stayed and went, nor ever ceased to smile.

   Came and stayed and went, and now when all is finished,
      You alone have crossed the melancholy stream,
   Yours the pang, but his, O his, the undiminished
      Undecaying gladness, undeparted dream.

   All that life contains of torture, toil, and treason,
      Shame, dishonour, death, to him were but a name.
   Here, a boy, he dwelt through all the singing season
      And ere the day of sorrow departed as he came.

_Davos_, 1881.



XXVIIIâTO MY FATHER


   PEACE and her huge invasion to these shores
   Puts daily home; innumerable sails
   Dawn on the far horizon and draw near;
   Innumerable loves, uncounted hopes
   To our wild coasts, not darkling now, approach:
   Not now obscure, since thou and thine are there,
   And bright on the lone isle, the foundered reef,
   The long, resounding foreland, Pharos stands.

   These are thy works, O father, these thy crown;
   Whether on high the air be pure, they shine
   Along the yellowing sunset, and all night
   Among the unnumbered stars of God they shine;
   Or whether fogs arise and far and wide
   The low sea-level drownâeach finds a tongue
   And all night long the tolling bell resounds:
   So shine, so toll, till night be overpast,
   Till the stars vanish, till the sun return,
   And in the haven rides the fleet secure.

   In the first hour, the seaman in his skiff
   Moves through the unmoving bay, to where the town
   Its earliest smoke into the air upbreathes
   And the rough hazels climb along the beach.
   To the tuggâd oar the distant echo speaks.
   The ship lies resting, where by reef and roost
   Thou and thy lights have led her like a child.

   This hast thou done, and Iâcan I be base?
   I must arise, O father, and to port
   Some lost, complaining seaman pilot home.



XXIXâIN THE STATES


   WITH half a heart I wander here
      As from an age gone by
   A brotherâyet though young in years.
      An elder brother, I.

   You speak another tongue than mine,
      Though both were English born.
   I towards the night of time decline,
      You mount into the morn.

   Youth shall grow great and strong and free,
      But age must still decay:
   To-morrow for the Statesâfor me,
      England and Yesterday.

_San Francisco_.



XXXâA PORTRAIT


   I AM a kind of farthing dip,
      Unfriendly to the nose and eyes;
   A blue-behinded ape, I skip
      Upon the trees of Paradise.

   At mankindâs feast, I take my place
      In solemn, sanctimonious state,
   And have the air of saying grace
      While I defile the dinner plate.

   I am âthe smiler with the knife,â
      The battener upon garbage, Iâ
   Dear Heaven, with such a rancid life,
      Were it not better far to die?

   Yet still, about the human pale,
      I love to scamper, love to race,
   To swing by my irreverent tail
      All over the most holy place;

   And when at length, some golden day,
      The unfailing sportsman, aiming at,
   Shall bag, meâall the world shall say:
      _Thank God_, _and thereâs an end of that_!



XXXI


   SING clearlier, Muse, or evermore be still,
   Sing truer or no longer sing!
   No more the voice of melancholy Jacques
   To wake a weeping echo in the hill;
   But as the boy, the pirate of the spring,
   From the green elm a living linnet takes,
   One natural verse recaptureâthen be still.



XXXIIâA CAMP {66}


   THE bed was made, the room was fit,
   By punctual eve the stars were lit;
   The air was still, the water ran,
   No need was there for maid or man,
   When we put up, my ass and I,
   At Godâs green caravanserai.



XXXIIIâTHE COUNTRY OF THE CAMISARDS {67}


   WE travelled in the print of olden wars,
      Yet all the land was green,
      And love we found, and peace,
      Where fire and war had been.

   They pass and smile, the children of the swordâ
      No more the sword they wield;
      And O, how deep the corn
      Along the battlefield!



XXXIVâSKERRYVORE


   FOR love of lovely words, and for the sake
   Of those, my kinsmen and my countrymen,
   Who early and late in the windy ocean toiled
   To plant a star for seamen, where was then
   The surfy haunt of seals and cormorants:
   I, on the lintel of this cot, inscribe
   The name of a strong tower.



XXXVâSKERRYVORE: THE PARALLEL


   HERE all is sunny, and when the truant gull
   Skims the green level of the lawn, his wing
   Dispetals roses; here the house is framed
   Of kneaded brick and the plumed mountain pine,
   Such clay as artists fashion and such wood
   As the tree-climbing urchin breaks.  But there
   Eternal granite hewn from the living isle
   And dowelled with brute iron, rears a tower
   That from its wet foundation to its crown
   Of glittering glass, stands, in the sweep of winds,
   Immovable, immortal, eminent.



XXXVI


   _My house_, I say.  But hark to the sunny doves
   That make my roof the arena of their loves,
   That gyre about the gable all day long
   And fill the chimneys with their murmurous song:
   _Our house_, they say; and _mine_, the cat declares
   And spreads his golden fleece upon the chairs;
   And _mine_ the dog, and rises stiff with wrath
   If any alien foot profane the path.
   So too the buck that trimmed my terraces,
   Our whilome gardener, called the garden his;
   Who now, deposed, surveys my plain abode
   And his late kingdom, only from the road.



XXXVII


   MY body which my dungeon is,
   And yet my parks and palaces:â
      Which is so great that there I go
   All the day long to and fro,
   And when the night begins to fall
   Throw down my bed and sleep, while all
   The building hums with wakefulnessâ
   Even as a child of savages
   When evening takes her on her way,
   (She having roamed a summerâs day
   Along the mountain-sides and scalp)
   Sleeps in an antre of that alp:â
      Which is so broad and high that there,
   As in the topless fields of air,
   My fancy soars like to a kite
   And faints in the blue infinite:â
      Which is so strong, my strongest throes
   And the rough worldâs besieging blows
   Not break it, and so weak withal,
   Death ebbs and flows in its loose wall
   As the green sea in fishersâ nets,
   And tops its topmost parapets:â
      Which is so wholly mine that I
   Can wield its whole artillery,
   And mine so little, that my soul
   Dwells in perpetual control,
   And I but think and speak and do
   As my dead fathers move me to:â
      If this born body of my bones
   The beggared soul so barely owns,
   What money passed from hand to hand,
   What creeping custom of the land,
   What deed of author or assign,
   Can make a house a thing of mine?



XXXVIII


   SAY not of me that weakly I declined
   The labours of my sires, and fled the sea,
   The towers we founded and the lamps we lit,
   To play at home with paper like a child.
   But rather say: _In the afternoon of time_
   _A strenuous family dusted from its hands_
   _The sand of granite_, _and beholding far_
   _Along the sounding coast its pyramids_
   _And tall memorials catch the dying sun_,
   _Smiled well content_, _and to this childish task_
   _Around the fire addressed its evening hours_.




BOOK II.â_In Scots_


TABLE OF COMMON SCOTTISH VOWEL SOUNDS

ae, ai                              open A as in rare.
aâ, au, aw                          AW as in law.
ea                                  open E as in mere, but this with
                                    exceptions, as heather = heather,
                                    wean = wain, lear = lair.
ee, ei, ie                          open E as in mere.
oa                                  open O as in more.
ou                                  doubled O as in poor.
ow                                  OW as in bower.
u                                   doubled O as in poor.
ui or Ã¼ before R                    (say roughly) open A as in rare.
ui or Ã¼ before any other            (say roughly) close I as in grin.
consonant
y                                   open I as in kite.
i                                   pretty nearly what you please,
                                    much as in English, Heaven guide
                                    the reader through that
                                    labyrinth!  But in Scots it
                                    dodges usually from the short I,
                                    as in grin, to the open E, as in
                                    mere.  Find the blind, I may
                                    remark, are pronounced to rhyme
                                    with the preterite of grin.





IâTHE MAKER TO POSTERITY


   FAR âyont amang the years to be
   When aâ we think, anâ aâ we see,
   Anâ aâ we luve, âs been dung ajee
         By timeâs rouch shouther,
   Anâ what was richt and wrang for me
         Lies mangled throuâther,

   Itâs possibleâitâs hardly mairâ
   That some ane, ripinâ after learâ
   Some auld professor or young heir,
         If still thereâs eitherâ
   May find anâ read me, anâ be sair
         Perplexed, puir brither!

   â_What tongue does your auld bookie speak_?â
   Heâll spier; anâ I, his mou to steik:
   â_No beinâ fit to write in Greek_,
         _I write in Lallan_,
   _Dear to my heart as the peat reek_,
         _Auld as Tantallon_.

   â_Few spak it then_, _anâ noo thereâs nane_.
   _My puir auld sangs lie aâ their lane_,
   _Their sense_, _that aince was braw anâ plain_,
         _Tint aâthegether_,
   _Like runes upon a standinâ stane_
         _Amang the heather_.

   â_But think not you the brae to speel_;
   _You_, _tae_, _maun chow the bitter peel_;
   _For aâ your lear_, _for aâ your skeel_,
         _Yeâre nane sae lucky_;
   _Anâ things are mebbe waur than weel_
         _For you_, _my buckie_.

   â_The hale concern_ (_baith hens anâ eggs_,
   _Baith books anâ writers_, _stars anâ clegs_)
   _Noo stachers upon lowsent legs_
         _Anâ wears awaâ_;
   _The tack oâ mankind_, _near the dregs_,
         _Rins unco law_.

   â_Your book_, _that in some braw new tongue_,
   _Ye wrote or prentit_, _preached or sung_,
   _Will still be just a bairn_, _anâ young_
         _In fame anâ years_,
   _Whan the hale planetâs guts are dung_
         _About your ears_;

   â_Anâ you_, _sair gruppinâ to a spar_
   _Or whammled wiâ some bleezinâ star_,
   _Cryinâ to ken whaur deil ye are_,
         _Hame_, _France_, _or Flanders_â
   _Whang sindry like a railway car_
         _Anâ flie in danders_.â



IIâILLE TERRARUM


   FRAE nirly, nippinâ, Easâlanâ breeze,
   Frae Norlanâ snaw, anâ haar oâ seas,
   Weel happit in your gairden trees,
         A bonny bit,
   Atween the muckle Pentlandâs knees,
         Secure ye sit.

   Beeches anâ aiks entwine their theek,
   Anâ firs, a stench, auld-farrant clique.
   Aâ simmer day, your chimleys reek,
         Couthy and bien;
   Anâ here anâ there your windies keek
         Amang the green.

   A pickle plats anâ paths anâ posies,
   A wheen auld gillyflowers anâ roses:
   A ring oâ waâs the hale encloses
         Frae sheep or men;
   Anâ there the auld housie beeks anâ dozes,
         Aâ by her lane.

   The gairdner crooks his weary back
   Aâ day in the pitaty-track,
   Or mebbe stops awhile to crack
         Wiâ Jane the cook,
   Or at some buss, worm-eaten-black,
         To gie a look.

   Frae the high hills the curlew caâs;
   The sheep gang baaing by the waâs;
   Or whiles a clan oâ roosty craws
         Cangle thegether;
   The wild bees seek the gairden raws,
         Weariet wiâ heather.

   Or in the gloaminâ douce anâ gray
   The sweet-throat mavis tunes her lay;
   The herd comes linkinâ doun the brae;
         Anâ by degrees
   The muckle siller mÃ¼ne maks way
         Amang the trees.

   Here aft hae I, wiâ sober heart,
   For meditation sat apairt,
   When orra loves or kittle art
         Perplexed my mind;
   Here socht a balm for ilka smart
         Oâ humankind.

   Here aft, weel neukit by my lane,
   Wiâ Horace, or perhaps Montaigne,
   The morninâ hours hae come anâ gane
         AbÃ¼ne my heidâ
   I wadnae giâen a chucky-stane
         For aâ Iâd read.

   But noo the auld city, street by street,
   Anâ winter fuâ oâ snaw anâ sleet,
   Awhile shut in my gangrel feet
         Anâ goavinâ mettle;
   Noo is the soopit ingle sweet,
         Anâ liltinâ kettle.

   Anâ noo the winter winds complain;
   Cauld lies the glaur in ilka lane;
   On draigled hizzie, tautit wean
         Anâ drucken lads,
   In the mirk nicht, the winter rain
         Dribbles anâ blads.

   Whan bugles frae the Castle rock,
   Anâ beaten drums wiâ dowie shock,
   Wauken, at cauld-rife sax oâclock,
         My chitterinâ frame,
   I mind me on the kintry cock,
         The kintry hame.

   I mind me on yon bonny bield;
   Anâ Fancy traivels far afield
   To gaither aâ that gairdens yield
         Oâ sun anâ Simmer:
   To hearten up a dowie chield,
         Fancyâs the limmer!



III


   WHEN aince Aprile has fairly come,
   Anâ birds may bigg in winterâs lum,
   Anâ pleisureâs spreid for aâ and some
         Oâ whatna state,
   Love, wiâ her auld recruitinâ drum,
         Than taks the gate.

   The heart plays dunt wiâ main anâ micht;
   The lassesâ een are aâ sae bricht,
   Their dresses are sae braw anâ ticht,
         The bonny birdies!â
   Puir winter virtue at the sicht
         Gangs heels ower hurdies.

   Anâ aye as love frae land to land
   Tirls the drum wiâ eident hand,
   Aâ men collect at her command,
         Toun-bred or landâart,
   Anâ follow in a denty band
         Her gaucy standart.

   Anâ I, wha sang oâ rain anâ snaw,
   Anâ weary winter weel awaâ,
   Noo busk me in a jacket braw,
         Anâ tak my place
   Iâ the ram-stam, harum-scarum raw,
         Wiâ smilinâ face.



IVâA MILE ANâ A BITTOCK


   A MILE anâ a bittock, a mile or twa,
   AbÃ¼the burn, ayont the law,
   Davie anâ Donalâ anâ Cherlie anâ aâ,
      Anâ the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly!

   Ane went hame wiâ the ither, anâ then
   The ither went hame wiâ the ither twa men,
   Anâ baith wad return him the service again,
      Anâ the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly!

   The clocks were chappinâ in house anâ haâ,
   Eleeven, twal anâ ane anâ twa;
   Anâ the guidmanâs face was turnt to the waâ,
      Anâ the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly!

   A wind got up frae affa the sea,
   It blew the stars as clearâs could be,
   It blew in the een of aâ oâ the three,
      Anâ the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly!

   Noo, Davie was first to get sleep in his head,
   âThe best oâ frienâs maun twine,â he said;
   âIâm weariet, anâ here Iâm awaâ to my bed.â
      Anâ the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly!

   Twa oâ them walkinâ anâ crackinâ their lane,
   The morninâ licht cam gray anâ plain,
   Anâ the birds they yammert on stick anâ stane,
      Anâ the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly!

   O years ayont, O years awaâ,
   My lads, yeâll mind whateâer befaââ
   My lads, yeâll mind on the bield oâ the law,
      When the mÃ¼ne was shininâ clearly.



VâA LOWDEN SABBATH MORN


   THE clinkum-clank oâ Sabbath bells
   Noo to the hoastinâ rookery swells,
   Noo faintinâ laigh in shady dells,
         Sounds far anâ near,
   Anâ through the simmer kintry tells
         Its tale oâ cheer.

   Anâ noo, to that melodious play,
   Aâ deidly awn the quiet swayâ
   Aâ ken their solemn holiday,
         Bestial anâ human,
   The singinâ lintie on the brae,
         The restinâ plouâman,

   He, mair than aâ the lave oâ men,
   His week completit joys to ken;
   Half-dressed, he daunders out anâ in,
         Perplext wiâ leisure;
   Anâ his raxt limbs heâll rax again
         Wiâ painfÃ¼â pleesure.

   The steerinâ mither strang afit
   Noo shoos the bairnies but a bit;
   Noo cries them ben, their Sinday shÃ¼it
         To scart upon them,
   Or sweeties in their pouch to pit,
         Wiâ blessinâs on them.

   The lasses, clean frae tap to taes,
   Are busked in crunklinâ underclaes;
   The gartened hose, the weel-filled stays,
         The nakit shift,
   Aâ bleached on bonny greens for days,
         Anâ whiteâs the drift.

   Anâ noo to face the kirkward mile:
   The guidmanâs hat oâ dacent style,
   The blackit shoon, we noo maun fyle
         As whiteâs the miller:
   A waefÃ¼â peety tae, to spile
         The warth oâ siller.

   Our Margâet, aye sae keen to crack,
   Douce-stappinâ in the stoury track,
   Her emeralt goun aâ kiltit back
         Frae snawy coats,
   White-ankled, leads the kirkward pack
         Wiâ Dauvit Groats.

   A thocht ahint, in runkled breeks,
   Aâ spiled wiâ lyinâ by for weeks,
   The guidman follows closs, anâ cleiks
         The sonsie missis;
   His sarious face at aince bespeaks
         The day that this is.

   And aye anâ while we nearer draw
   To whaur the kirkton lies alaw,
   Mair neebours, cominâ saft anâ slaw
         Frae here anâ there,
   The thicker thrang the gate anâ caw
         The stour in air.

   But hark! the bells frae nearer clang;
   To rowst the slaw, their sides they bang;
   Anâ see! black coats aâready thrang
         The green kirkyaird;
   And at the yett, the chestnuts spang
         That brocht the laird.

   The solemn elders at the plate
   Stand drinkinâ deep the pride oâ state:
   The practised hands as gash anâ great
         As Lords oâ Session;
   The later named, a wee thing blate
         In their expression.

   The prentit stanes that mark the deid,
   Wiâ lengthened lip, the sarious read;
   Syne wag a moraleesinâ heid,
         Anâ then anâ there
   Their hirplinâ practice anâ their creed
         Try hard to square.

   Itâs here our Merren lang has lain,
   A wee bewast the table-stane;
   Anâ yonâs the grave oâ Sandy Blane;
         Anâ further ower,
   The mitherâs brithers, dacent men!
         Lie aâ the fower.

   Here the guidman sall bide awee
   To dwall amang the deid; to see
   Auld faces clear in fancyâs eâe;
         Belike to hear
   Auld voices faâin saft anâ slee
         On fancyâs ear.

   Thus, on the day oâ solemn things,
   The bell that in the steeple swings
   To fauld a scaittered faimâly rings
         Its walcome screed;
   Anâ just a wee thing nearer brings
         The quick anâ deid.

   But noo the bell is ringinâ in;
   To tak their places, folk begin;
   The minister himselâ will shÃ¼ne
         Be up the gate,
   Filled fuâ wiâ clavers about sin
         Anâ manâs estate.

   The tÃ¼nes are upâ_French_, to be shÃ¼re,
   The faithfÃ¼â _French_, anâ twa-three mair;
   The auld prezentor, hoastinâ sair,
         Wales out the portions,
   Anâ yirks the tÃ¼ne into the air
         Wiâ queer contortions.

   Follows the prayer, the readinâ next,
   Anâ than the fisslinâ for the textâ
   The twa-three last to find it, vext
         But kind oâ proud;
   Anâ than the peppermints are raxed,
         Anâ southernwood.

   For nooâs the time whan pews are seen
   Nid-noddinâ like a mandareen;
   When tenty mithers stap a preen
         In sleepinâ weans;
   Anâ nearly half the parochine
         Forget their pains.

   Thereâs just a waukrifâ twa or three:
   Thrawn commentautors sweer to âgree,
   Weans glowrinâ at the bumlinâ bee
         On windie-glasses,
   Or lads that tak a keek a-glee
         At sonsie lasses.

   Himselâ, meanwhile, frae whaur he cocks
   Anâ bobs belaw the soundinâ-box,
   The treesures of his words unlocks
         Wiâ prodigality,
   Anâ deals some unco dinginâ knocks
         To infidality.

   Wiâ sappy unction, hoo he burkes
   The hopes oâ men that trust in works,
   Expounds the fauâts oâ ither kirks,
         Anâ shaws the best oâ them
   No muckle better than mere Turks,
         When aâs confessed oâ them.

   Bethankit! what a bonny creed!
   What mair would ony Christian need?â
   The braw words rummâle ower his heid,
         Nor steer the sleeper;
   And in their restinâ graves, the deid
         Sleep aye the deeper.

_Note_.âIt may be guessed by some that I had a certain parish in my eye,
and this makes it proper I should add a word of disclamation.  In my time
there have been two ministers in that parish.  Of the first I have a
special reason to speak well, even had there been any to think ill.  The
second I have often met in private and long (in the due phrase) âsat
underâ in his church, and neither here nor there have I heard an unkind
or ugly word upon his lips.  The preacher of the text had thus no
original in that particular parish; but when I was a boy, he might have
been observed in many others; he was then (like the schoolmaster) abroad;
and by recent advices, it would seem he has not yet entirely disappeared.



VIâTHE SPAEWIFE


   O, I wad like to kenâto the beggar-wife says Iâ
   Why chops are guid to brander and nane sae guid to fry.
   Anâ siller, thatâs sae braw to keep, is brawer still to giâe.
   â_Itâs gey anâ easy spierinâ_, says the beggar-wife to me.

   O, I wad like to kenâto the beggar-wife says Iâ
   Hoo aâ things come to be whaur we find them when we try,
   The lasses in their claes anâ the fishes in the sea.
   â_Itâs gey anâ easy spierinâ_, says the beggar-wife to me.

   O, I wad like to kenâto the beggar-wife says Iâ
   Why lads are aâ to sell anâ lasses aâ to buy;
   Anâ naebody for dacency but barely twa or three
   â_Itâs gey anâ easy spierinâ_, says the beggar-wife to me.

   O, I wad like to kenâto the beggar-wife says Iâ
   Gin deathâs as shÃ¼re to men as killinâ is to kye,
   Why God has filled the yearth sae fuâ oâ tasty things to pree.
   â_Itâs gey anâ easy spierinâ_, says the beggar-wife to me.

   O, I wad like to kenâto the beggar wife says Iâ
   The reason oâ the cause anâ the wherefore oâ the why,
   Wiâ mony anither riddle brings the tear into my eâe.
   â_Itâs gey anâ easy spierinâ_, says the beggar-wife to me.



VIIâTHE BLASTâ1875


   ITâS raininâ.  Weetâs the gairden sod,
   Weet the lang roads whaur gangrels plodâ
   A maist unceevil thing oâ God
         In mid Julyâ
   If yeâll just curse the sneckdraw, dod!
         Anâ sae wull I!

   Heâs a braw place in Heevân, ye ken,
   Anâ leaâs us puir, forjaskit men
   Clamjamfried in the but and ben
         He caâs the earthâ
   A wee bit inconvenient den
         No muckle worth;

   Anâ whiles, at orra times, keeks out,
   Sees what puir mankind are about;
   Anâ if He can, Iâve little doubt,
         Upsets their plans;
   He hates aâ mankind, brainch and root,
         Anâ aâ thatâs manâs.

   Anâ whiles, whan they tak heart again,
   Anâ life iâ the sun looks braw anâ plain,
   Doun comes a jaw oâ droukinâ rain
         Upon their honoursâ
   God sends a spate outower the plain,
         Or mebbe thunâers.

   Lord safe us, lifeâs an unco thing!
   Simmer anâ Winter, Yule anâ Spring,
   The damned, dour-heartit seasons bring
         A feck oâ trouble.
   I wadnae tryât to be a kingâ
         No, nor for double.

   But since weâre in it, willy-nilly,
   We maun be watchfÃ¼â, wise anâ skilly,
   Anâ no mind ony ither billy,
         Lassie nor God.
   But drinkâthatâs my best counsel till âe:
         Sae tak the nod.



VIIIâTHE COUNTERBLASTâ1886


   MY bonny man, the warld, itâs true,
   Was made for neither me nor you;
   Itâs just a place to warstle through,
         As job confessed oât;
   And aye the best that weâll can do
         Is mak the best oât.

   Thereâs rowth oâ wrang, Iâm free to say:
   The simmer brunt, the winter blae,
   The face of earth aâ fyled wiâ clay
         Anâ dour wiâ chuckies,
   Anâ life a rough anâ landâart play
         For country buckies.

   Anâ foodâs anither name for clart;
   Anâ beasts anâ brambles bite anâ scart;
   Anâ what would WE be like, my heart!
         If bared oâ claethinâ?
   âAweel, I cannae mend your cart:
         Itâs that or naethinâ.

   A feck oâ folk frae first to last
   Have through this queer experience passed;
   Twa-three, I ken, just damn anâ blast
         The hale transaction;
   But twa-three ithers, east anâ wast,
         Fand satisfaction,

   Whaur braid the briery muirs expand,
   A waefÃ¼â anâ a weary land,
   The bumblebees, a gowden band,
         Are blithely hinginâ;
   Anâ there the canty wanderer fand
         The laverock singinâ.

   Trout in the burn grow great as herrân,
   The simple sheep can find their fairânâ;
   The wind blaws clean about the cairn
         Wiâ caller air;
   The muircock anâ the barefit bairn
         Are happy there.

   Sic-like the howes oâ life to some:
   Green loans whaur they neâer fash their thumb.
   But mark the muckle winds that come
         Soopinâ anâ cool,
   Or hear the powrinâ burnie drum
         In the shilfaâs pool.

   The evil wiâ the guid they tak;
   They caâ a gray thing gray, no black;
   To a steigh brae, a stubborn back
         Addressinâ daily;
   Anâ up the rude, unbieldy track
         Oâ life, gang gaily.

   What you would likeâs a palace haâ,
   Or Sinday parlour dink anâ braw
   Wiâ aâ things ordered in a raw
         By denty leddies.
   Weel, than, ye cannae haeât: thatâs aâ
         That to be said is.

   Anâ since at life yeâve taen the grue,
   Anâ winnae blithely hirsle through,
   Yeâve fund the very thing to doâ
         Thatâs to drink speerit;
   Anâ shÃ¼ne weâll hear the last oâ youâ
         Anâ blithe to hear it!

   The shoon ye coft, the life ye lead,
   Ithers will heir when aince yeâre deid;
   Theyâll heir your tasteless bite oâ breid,
         Anâ find it sappy;
   Theyâll to your dulefÃ¼â house succeed,
         Anâ there be happy.

   As whan a glum anâ fractious wean
   Has sat anâ sullened by his lane
   Till, wiâ a rowstinâ skelp, heâs taen
         Anâ shooâd to bedâ
   The ither bairns aâ faâ to playânâ,
         As glegâs a gled.



IXâTHE COUNTERBLAST IRONICAL


   ITâS strange that God should fash to frame
      The yearth and lift sae hie,
   Anâ clean forget to explain the same
      To a gentleman like me.

   They gutsy, donnered ither folk,
      Their weird they weel may dree;
   But why present a pig in a poke
      To a gentleman like me?

   They ither folk their parritch eat
      Anâ sup their sugared tea;
   But the mind is no to be wyled wiâ meat
      Wiâ a gentleman like me.

   They ither folk, they court their joes
      At gloaminâ on the lea;
   But theyâre made of a commoner clay, I suppose,
      Than a gentleman like me.

   They ither folk, for richt or wrang,
      They suffer, bleed, or dee;
   But aâ thir things are an empây sang
      To a gentleman like me.

   Itâs a different thing that I demand,
      Thoâ humble as can beâ
   A statement fair in my Makerâs hand
      To a gentleman like me:

   A clear account writ fair anâ broad,
      Anâ a plain apologie;
   Or the deevil a ceevil word to God
      From a gentleman like me.



XâTHEIR LAUREATE TO AN ACADEMY CLASS DINNER CLUB


   DEAR Thamson class, whaureâer I gang
   It aye comes ower me wiâ a spang:
   â_Lordsake_! _they Thamson lads_â(_deil hang_
         _Or else Lord mend them_!)â
   _Anâ that wanchancy annual sang_
         _I neâer can send them_!â

   Straucht, at the name, a trusty tyke,
   My conscience girrs ahint the dyke;
   Straucht on my hinderlands I fyke
         To find a rhyme tâ ye;
   Pleasedâalthough mebbe no pleased-likeâ
         To gie my time tâye.

   â_Weel_,â anâ says you, wiâ heavinâ breist,
   â_Sae far_, _sae guid_, _but whatâs the neist_?
   _Yearly we gaither to the feast_,
         _Aâ hopefÃ¼â men_â
   _Yearly we skelloch_ â_Hang the beast_â
         _Nae sang again_!ââ

   My lads, anâ what am I to say?
   Ye shÃ¼rely ken the Museâs way:
   Yestreen, as glegâs a tykeâthe day,
         Thrawn like a cuddy:
   Her conducâ, that to herâs a play,
         Deith to a body.

   Aft whan I sat anâ made my mane,
   Aft whan I laboured burd-alane
   Fishinâ for rhymes anâ findinâ nane,
         Or nane were fit for yeâ
   Ye judged me cauldâs a chucky staneâ
         No carânâ a bit for ye!

   But saw ye neâer some pingeinâ bairn
   As weak as a pitaty-parânââ
   Less Ã¼sed wiâ guidinâ horse-shoe airn
         Than steerinâ crowdieâ
   Packed aff his lane, by moss anâ cairn,
         To caâ the howdie.

   Waeâs me, for the puir callant than!
   He wambles like a poke oâ bran,
   Anâ the lowse rein, as hardâs he can,
         Puâs, tremâlinâ handit;
   Till, blaff! upon his hinderlanâ
         Behauld him landit.

   Sic-likeâI awn the weary facââ
   Whan on my muse the gate I tak,
   Anâ see her gleed eâe raxinâ back
         To keek ahint her;â
   To me, the brig oâ Heevân gangs black
         As blackest winter.

   â_Lordsake_! _weâre aff_,â thinks I, â_but whaur_?
   _On what abhorred anâ whinny scaur_,
   _Or whammled in what sea oâ glaur_,
         _Will she desert me_?
   _Anâ will she just disgrace_? _or waur_â
         _Will she no hurt me_?â

   Kittle the quaere!  But at least
   The day Iâve backed the fashious beast,
   While she, wiâ mony a spang anâ reist,
         Flang heels ower bonnet;
   Anâ aâ triumphantâfor your feast,
         Hae! thereâs your sonnet!



XIâEMBRO HIE KIRK


   THE Lord Himselâ in former days
   Waled out the proper tÃ¼nes for praise
   Anâ named the proper kind oâ claes
         For folk to preach in:
   Preceese and in the chief oâ ways
         Important teachinâ.

   He ordered aâ things late and airâ;
   He ordered folk to stand at prayer,
   (Although I cannae just mind where
         He gave the warninâ,)
   Anâ pit pomatum on their hair
         On Sabbath morninâ.

   The hale oâ life by His commands
   Was ordered to a bodyâs hands;
   But see! this _corpus juris_ stands
         By aâ forgotten;
   Anâ Godâs religion in aâ lands
         Is deid anâ rotten.

   While thus the lave oâ mankindâs lost,
   Oâ Scotland still God maks His boastâ
   Puir Scotland, on whase barren coast
         A score or twa
   Auld wives wiâ mutches anâ a hoast
         Still keep His law.

   In Scotland, a wheen canty, plain,
   Douce, kintry-leevinâ folk retain
   The Truthâor did so ainceâalane
         Of aâ men leevinâ;
   Anâ noo just twa oâ them remainâ
         Just Begg anâ Niven.

   For noo, unfaithfÃ¼â, to the Lord
   Auld Scotland joins the rebel horde;
   Her human hymn-books on the board
         She noo displays:
   Anâ Embro Hie Kirkâs been restored
         In popish ways.

   O _punctum temporis_ for action
   To aâ oâ the reforminâ faction,
   If yet, by ony act or paction,
         Thocht, word, or sermon,
   This dark anâ damnable transaction
         Micht yet determine!

   For seeâas Doctor Begg explainsâ
   Hoo easy âtâs dÃ¼ne! a pickle weans,
   Wha in the Hie Street gaither stanes
         By his instruction,
   The uncovenantit, pentit panes
         Ding to destruction.

   Up, Niven, or ower lateâanâ dash
   Laigh in the glaur that carnal hash;
   Let spires and pews wiâ granâ stramash
         Thegether faâ;
   The rumlinâ kist oâ whustles smash
         In pieces smaâ.

   Noo choose ye out a walie hammer;
   About the knottit buttress clamâer;
   Alang the steep roof stoyt anâ stammer,
         A gate mis-chancy;
   On the aulâ spire, the bellsâ hie chaâmer,
         Dance your bit dancie.

   Ding, devel, dunt, destroy, anâ ruin,
   Wiâ carnal stanes the square bestrewinâ,
   Till your loud chaps frae Kyle to Fruin,
         Frae Hell to Heeven,
   Tell the guid wark that baith are doinââ
         Baith Begg anâ Niven.



XIIâTHE SCOTSMANâS RETURN FROM ABROAD


In a letter from Mr. Thomson to Mr. Johnstone.

   IN mony a foreign pairt Iâve been,
   Anâ mony an unco ferlie seen,
   Since, Mr. Johnstone, you and I
   Last walkit upon Cocklerye.
   Wiâ gleg, observant een, I passât
   By sea anâ land, through East anâ Wast,
   And still in ilka age anâ station
   Saw naething but abomination.
   In thir uncovenantit lands
   The gangrel Scot uplifts his hands

   At lack of aâ sectarian fÃ¼shân,
   Anâ cauld religious destitÃ¼tion.
   He rins, puir man, frae place to place,
   Tries aâ their graceless means oâ grace,
   Preacher on preacher, kirk on kirkâ
   This yin a stot anâ thon a stirkâ
   A bletherinâ clan, no warth a preen,
   As bad as Smith of Aiberdeen!

   At last, across the weary faem,
   Frae far, outlandish pairts I came.
   On ilka side oâ me I fand
   Fresh tokens oâ my native land.
   Wiâ whatna joy I hailed them aââ
   The hilltaps standinâ raw by raw,
   The public house, the Hielanâ birks,
   And aâ the bonny U.P. kirks!
   But maistly thee, the bluid oâ Scots,
   Frae Maidenkirk to John oâ Grots,
   The king oâ drinks, as I conceive it,
   Talisker, Isla, or Glenlivet!

   For after years wiâ a pockmantie
   Frae Zanzibar to Alicante,
   In mony a fash and sair affliction
   I gieât as my sincere convictionâ
   Of aâ their foreign tricks anâ pliskies,
   I maist abominate their whiskies.
   Nae doot, themselâs, they ken it weel,
   Anâ wiâ a hash oâ leemon peel,
   And ice anâ siccan filth, they ettle
   The stawsome kind oâ goo to settle;
   Sic wersh apothecaryâs broos wiâ
   As Scotsmen scorn to fyle their mooâs wiâ.

   Anâ, man, I was a blithe hame-comer
   Whan first I syndit out my rummer.
   Ye should hae seen me then, wiâ care
   The less important pairts prepare;
   Syne, weel contentit wiâ it aâ,
   Pour in the sperrits wiâ a jaw!
   I didnae drink, I didnae speak,â
   I only snowkit up the reek.
   I was sae pleased therein to paidle,
   I sat anâ plowtered wiâ my ladle.

   Anâ blithe was I, the morrowâs morn,
   To daunder through the stookit corn,
   And after aâ my strange mishanters,
   Sit doun amang my ain dissenters.
   Anâ, man, it was a joy to me
   The puâpit anâ the pews to see,
   The pennies dirlinâ in the plate,
   The elders lookinâ on in state;
   Anâ âmang the first, as it befell,
   Wha should I see, sir, but yourselâ

   I was, and I will no deny it,
   At the first gliff a hantle tryit
   To see yourselâ in sic a stationâ
   It seemed a doubtfÃ¼â dispensation.
   The feelinâ was a mere digression;
   For shÃ¼ne I understood the session,
   Anâ mindinâ Aiken anâ MâNeil,
   I wondered they had dÃ¼ne sae weel.
   I saw I had myselâ to blame;
   For had I but remained at hame,
   Aiblinsâthough no avaâ deservinâ âtâ
   They micht hae named your humble servant.

   The kirk was filled, the door was steeked;
   Up to the puâpit ance I keeked;
   I was mair pleased than I can tellâ
   It was the minister himselâ!
   Proud, proud was I to see his face,
   After sae lang awaâ frae grace.
   Pleased as I was, Iâm no denyinâ
   Some maitters were not edifyinâ;
   For first I fandâanâ here was news!â
   Mere hymn-books cockinâ in the pewsâ
   A humanised abomination,
   Unfit for ony congregation.
   Syne, while I still was on the tenter,
   I scunnered at the new prezentor;
   I thocht him gesterinâ anâ cauldâ
   A sair declension frae the auld.
   Syne, as though aâ the faith was wreckit,
   The prayer was not what Iâd exspeckit.
   Himselâ, as it appeared to me,
   Was no the man he Ã¼sed to be.
   But just as I was growinâ vext
   He waled a maist judeecious text,
   Anâ, launchinâ into his prelections,
   Swoopt, wiâ a skirl, on aâ defections.

   O what a gale was on my speerit
   To hear the pâints oâ doctrine clearit,
   And aâ the horrors oâ damnation
   Set furth wiâ faithfÃ¼â ministration!
   Nae shauchlinâ testimony hereâ
   We were aâ damned, anâ that was clear,
   I owned, wiâ gratitude anâ wonder,
   He was a pleisure to sit under.



XIII


   LATE in the nicht in bed I lay,
   The winds were at their weary play,
   Anâ tirlinâ waâs anâ skirlinâ wae
         Through Heevân they battered;â
   On-ding oâ hail, on-blaff oâ spray,
         The tempest blattered.

   The masoned house it dinled through;
   It dung the ship, it cowped the cooâ.
   The rankit aiks it overthrew,
         Had braved aâ weathers;
   The strang sea-gleds it took anâ blew
         Awaâ like feathers.

   The thrawes oâ fear on aâ were shed,
   Anâ the hair rose, anâ slumber fled,
   Anâ lichts were lit anâ prayers were said
         Through aâ the kintry;
   Anâ the cauld terror clum in bed
         Wiâ aâ anâ sindry.

   To hear in the pit-mirk on hie
   The brangled collieshangie flie,
   The warlâ, they thocht, wiâ land anâ sea,
         Itselâ wad cowpit;
   Anâ for auld airn, the smashed debris
         By God be rowpit.

   Meanwhile frae far Aldeboran,
   To folks wiâ talescopes in hanâ,
   Oâ ships that cowpit, winds that ran,
         Nae sign was seen,
   But the wee warlâ in sunshine span
         As brichtâs a preen.

   I, tae, by Godâs especial grace,
   Dwall denty in a bieldy place,
   Wiâ hosened feet, wiâ shaven face,
         Wiâ dacent mainners:
   A grand example to the race
         Oâ tautit sinners!

   The wind may blaw, the heathen rage,
   The deil may start on the rampage;â
   The sick in bed, the thief in cageâ
         Whatâs aâ to me?
   Cosh in my house, a sober sage,
         I sit anâ see.

   Anâ whiles the bluid spangs to my bree,
   To lie sae saft, to live sae free,
   While better men maun do anâ die
         In unco places.
   â_Whaurâs God_?â I cry, anâ â_Whae is me_
         _To hae sic graces_?â

   I mind the fecht the sailors keep,
   But fire or canâle, rest or sleep,
   In darkness anâ the muckle deep;
         Anâ mind beside
   The herd that on the hills oâ sheep
         Has wandered wide.

   I mind me on the hoastinâ weansâ
   The penny joes on causey stanesâ
   The auld folk wiâ the crazy banes,
         Baith auld anâ puir,
   That aye maun thole the winds anâ rains
         Anâ labour sair.

   Anâ whiles Iâm kind oâ pleased a blink,
   Anâ kind oâ fleyed forby, to think,
   For aâ my rowth oâ meat anâ drink
         Anâ waste oâ crumb,
   Iâll mebbe have to thole wiâ skink
         In Kingdom Come.

   For God whan jowes the Judgment bell,
   Wiâ His ain Hand, His Leevinâ Selâ,
   Sall ryve the guid (as Prophets tell)
         Frae them that had it;
   And in the reaminâ pat oâ Hell,
         The rich be scaddit.

   O Lord, if this indeed be sae,
   Let daw that sair anâ happy day!
   Againâ the warlâ, grawn auld anâ gray,
         Up wiâ your aixe!
   Anâ let the puir enjoy their playâ
         Iâll thole my paiks.



XIVâMY CONSCIENCE!


   OF aâ the ills that flesh can fear,
   The loss oâ frienâs, the lack oâ gear,
   A yowlinâ tyke, a glandered mear,
         A lassieâs nonsenseâ
   Thereâs just ae thing I cannae bear,
         Anâ thatâs my conscience.

   Whan day (anâ aâ excÃ¼se) has gane,
   Anâ wark is dÃ¼ne, and dutyâs plain,
   Anâ to my chalmer aâ my lane
         I creep apairt,
   My conscience! hoo the yammerinâ pain
         Stends to my heart!

   Aâ day wiâ various ends in view
   The hairsts oâ time I had to puâ,
   Anâ made a hash wad staw a soo,
         Let be a man!â
   My conscience! whan my hanâs were fuâ,
         Whaur were ye than?

   Anâ there were aâ the lures oâ life,
   There pleesure skirlinâ on the fife,
   There anger, wiâ the hotchinâ knife
         Ground shairp in Hellâ
   My conscience!âyou thatâs like a wife!â
         Whaur was yourselâ?

   I ken it fine: just waitinâ here,
   To gar the evil waur appear,
   To clart the guid, confÃ¼se the clear,
         Mis-caâ the great,
   My conscience! anâ to raise a steer
         Whan aâs ower late.

   Sic-like, some tyke grawn auld and blind,
   Whan thieves brokâ through the gear to pâind,
   Has lain his dozened length anâ grinned
         At the disaster;
   Anâ the mornâs morninâ, wudâs the wind,
         Yokes on his master.



XVâTO DOCTOR JOHN BROWN


   (_Whan the dear doctor_, _dear to aâ_,
   _Was still amang us here belaw_,
   _I set my pipes his praise to blaw_
         _Wiâ aâ my speerit_;
   _But noo_, _Dear Doctor_! _heâs awaâ_,
         _Anâ neâer can hear it_.)

   BY Lyne and Tyne, by Thames and Tees,
   By aâ the various river-Deeâs,
   In Mars and Manors âyont the seas
         Or here at hame,
   Whaureâer thereâs kindly folk to please,
         They ken your name.

   They ken your name, they ken your tyke,
   They ken the honey from your byke;
   But mebbe after aâ your fyke,
         (The trÃ¼th to tell)
   Itâs just your honest Rab they like,
         Anâ no yourselâ.

   As at the gowff, some canny playâr
   Should tee a common baâ wiâ careâ
   Should flourish and deleever fair
         His souple shintieâ
   Anâ the baâ rise into the air,
         A leevinâ lintie:

   Sae in the game we writers play,
   There comes to some a bonny day,
   When a dear ferlie shall repay
         Their years oâ strife,
   Anâ like your Rab, their things oâ clay,
         Spreid wings oâ life.

   Ye scarce deserved it, Iâm afraidâ
   You that had never learned the trade,
   But just some idle morninâ strayed
         Into the schÃ¼le,
   Anâ picked the fiddle up anâ played
         Like Neil himselâ.

   Your eâe was gleg, your fingers dink;
   Ye didnae fash yourselâ to think,
   But wove, as fast as puss can link,
         Your denty wab:â
   Ye stapped your pen into the ink,
         Anâ there was Rab!

   Sinsyne, whaureâer your fortune lay
   By dowie den, by canty brae,
   Simmer anâ winter, nicht anâ day,
         Rab was aye wiâ ye;
   Anâ aâ the folk on aâ the way
         Were blithe to see ye.

   O sir, the gods are kind indeed,
   Anâ hauld ye for an honoured heid,
   That for a wee bit clarkit screed
         Sae weel reward ye,
   Anâ lendâpuir Rabbie beinâ deidâ
         His ghaist to guard ye.

   For though, whaureâer yourselâ may be,
   Weâve just to turn anâ glisk a wee,
   Anâ Rab at heel weâre shÃ¼re to see
         Wiâ gladsome caper:â
   The bogle of a bogle, heâ
         A ghaist oâ paper!

   And as the auld-farrand hero sees
   In Hell a bogle Hercules,
   Pit there the lesser deid to please,
         While he himselâ
   Dwalls wiâ the muckle gods at ease
         Far raised frae hell:

   Sae the true Rabbie far has gane
   On kindlier business oâ his ain
   Wiâ aulder frienâs; anâ his breist-bane
         Anâ stumpie tailie,
   He birstles at a new hearth stane
         By James and Ailie.



XVI


   ITâS an owercome sooth for age anâ youth
      And it brooks wiâ nae denial,
   That the dearest friends are the auldest friends
      And the young are just on trial.

   Thereâs a rival bauld wiâ young anâ auld
      And itâs him that has bereft me;
   For the sÃ¼rest friends are the auldest friends
      And the maist oâ mines hae left me.

   There are kind hearts still, for friends to fill
      And fools to take and break them;
   But the nearest friends are the auldest friends
      And the graveâs the place to seek them.

                                * * * * *

            _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




Footnotes


{27}  _Life on the Lagoons_, by H. F. Brown, originally burned in the
fire at Messrs. Kegan Paul, Trench. and Co.âs.

{66}  From _Travels with a Donkey_.

{67}  From _Travels with a Donkey_.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDERWOODS***


******* This file should be named 438-0.txt or 438-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/3/438



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
