ï»¿Project Gutenberg's To The Fore With the Tanks!, by Percy F. Westerman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: To The Fore With the Tanks!

Author: Percy F. Westerman

Release Date: February 29, 2016 [EBook #51332]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO THE FORE WITH THE TANKS! ***




Produced by R.G.P.M. van Giesen




[Illustration: cover]




TO THE FORE WITH THE TANKS!




THE GREAT
ADVENTURE
SERIES

PERCY F. WESTERMAN:
THE AIRSHIP "GOLDEN HIND"
TO THE FORE WITH THE TANKS
THE SECRET BATTLEPLANE
WILMSHURST OF THE FRONTIER FORCE

ROWLAND WALKER:
DEVILLE MCKEENE
    THE EXPLOITS OF THE MYSTERY
    AIRMAN
BLAKE OF THE MERCHANT SERVICE
BUCKLE OF SUBMARINE V2
OSCAR DANBY, V.C.
DASTRAL OF THE FLYING CORPS
THE PHANTOM AIRMAN


S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.
4, 5, & 6 SOHO SQUARE,
LONDON, W.1.




TO THE FORE
WITH THE TANKS!



BY

PERCY F. WESTERMAN

AUTHOR OF
"A WATCHDOG OF THE NORTH SEA"; "A SUB. OF THE R.N.R."
"THE RIVAL SUBMARINES," ETC., ETC.



[Illustration: logo]



S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.
4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W.1.




MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN

_First Published 1917_
_Frequently Reprinted_




  CONTENTS

  CHAPTER
      I. TO THE FRONT
     II. THE COMMUNICATION TRENCH
    III. THE NIGHT ATTACK
     IV. GRUB
      V. THE EXPEDITION TO NO MAN'S LAND
     VI. A PRISONER OF WAR
    VII. THE FIRST ADVANCE
   VIII. CUT OFF
     IX. THE ADVANCE OF THE TANKS
      X. THE WRECKED LANDSHIP
     XI. AN INTERVIEW WITH THE C.O.
    XII. "THE BEST OF LUCK"
   XIII. THE BEGINNING OF THE GREATER PUSH
    XIV. THE COMMAND OF A TANK
     XV. THE BOGGED LANDSHIP
    XVI. ALDERHAME'S GOOD SHOT
   XVII. THE SPY
  XVIII. THE STRUGGLE FOR NEANCOURT VILLAGE
    XIX. THE MINED TUNNEL
     XX. THE FALL OF THE VON DER GOLZ REDOUBT
    XXI. TRAPPED
   XXII. TANK VERSUS LOCOMOTIVE
  XVIII. THE LAST STAND




TO THE FORE WITH
THE TANKS!




CHAPTER I

TO THE FRONT


THE jolting cattle-trucks pulled up with a disconcerting jerk at the
termination of a fifty-mile railway journey, performed in the
remarkably record time of fifteen hours.

From a springless truck, on which was painted the legend, "40 hommes
ou 8 chevaux," descended fifty-two tired but elated Tommies, thirsty,
ravenously hungry, but quite able to keep up a bantering conversation
with the peasants who had gathered by the side of the temporary line.

It was a miserable night, even for the Somme district in early March.
Rain was falling solidly. The ground was churned into deep mud of the
consistency of treacle. The gaunt gables of a dozen roofless houses,
silhouetted against the constant glare in the sky, betokened ruined
homes and uncomfortable billets; while the loud rumble of distant
artillery was in itself ample proof that at last the Second
Wheatshires had arrived somewhere on the Western Front--the goal of
six months' constant and arduous training.

Into the squelching mud the men stepped blithely. They were used to
it by this time. The double line of khaki-clad figures, showing dimly
through the darkness, shuffled impatiently. Here and there a man
would "hike" his pack to relieve the weight of the webbing equipment
over his shoulders, or sling his rifle while he lighted the almost
inseparable "fag." The distant flashes of the heavy guns glinted from
the wet "tin-hats" of the Tommies, as the unaccustomed head-gear
wobbled with every movement of the wearer's head. The issue of steel
trench helmets given before the commencement of the railway journey
had confirmed the rumour of the past fortnight--that No. 3 Platoon
was to be sent to join the rest of the battalion at the Front.

"Ah, well, 'tis certain he hath crossed River Somme,'" quoted Private
Graham Alderhame formerly of the Shakesperian Repertoire Company and
now a humble foot-slogging Tommy in a noted Line Regiment. "Well, if
this is across the Somme I don't think much of it. Another ten miles
by motor-bus, I suppose, and then something in the way of grub. Got a
cigarette on you, dear boy?"

Private Ralph Setley, who seven months previously had been a
bank-clerk in a busy provincial town, placed his rifle against a pile
of equipment that was serenely resting in the mud, and fumbled for a
packet of smokes. Then, having handed one of the contents to his
chum, he struck a match.

The light flickered upon the honest, deeply tanned features of a
typical British lad of about nineteen or twenty. In spite of a day of
extreme discomfort in the over-crowded horse-box which the French
Government placed at the disposal of Allied troops, his eyes twinkled
with the excitement of the moment. At last he was within sound of the
guns, and more, the chance of meeting a Hun was within measurable
distance.

Having lighted Alderhame's cigarette and his own, Setley was about to
throw the vilely sulphurous match to the ground when another voice
interposed:

"Hold hard, chum. Let's have a light."

Ralph was about to comply with the request when a hand shot out and
sent the still flaring match flying through the air.

"What's that for, George?" asked the disappointed applicant for a
light, with mingled truculence and resentment.

"'Cause 'tain't for no good; third chap as 'as a light from the same
match allus goes West--honest fact," replied Ginger Anderson, a
short, wiry man, who, according to his attestation papers, used to be
a gamekeeper, although others of his platoon swore that he had been
convicted three times for poaching.

"Listen!" exclaimed Alderhame, placing a hand on Setley's shoulder.

A short distance along the double line of waiting Tommies a hungry
Kentish man was endeavouring to persuade an ancient _paysanne_ to
sell some eggs. Judging by the man's injured tone his efforts were
not meeting with success.

"Wot, no compree?" he asked. "Des woffs, des woffs. Blimey, these old
Frenchies don't understand their own bloomin' language. Woffs, I
said, missis--them wot we calls heggs."

A motor-car with dimmed head-lights dashed up, throwing showers of
mud on either side like miniature cascades. From it descended a
great-coated staff-officer. The ranks stiffened. Something was in the
air. Information, perhaps, as to the place where the tired Tommies
were to be billeted.

"Who's in charge of this platoon?" rasped out an authoritative voice.

"I am, sir," replied a subaltern fresh from home, a beardless youth
of about nineteen, Stanley Dacres by name. "Details for the Second
Wheatshires."

"Quite about time," rejoined the staff officer. "You are to take your
men to the reserve trenches. Motor-buses for the first five miles.
With luck you ought to be there by midnight. Arms and equipment all
correct?"

"All correct, sir."

"Gas masks?"

"Two per man, sir."

"All right; see that one is returned. New pattern gas-helmets will be
issued. A guide will accompany you. Good night and good luck."

The staff officer vanished in the darkness, his place being taken by
a sergeant who had evidently emerged from an _estaminet_.

In single file the No. 3 Platoon marched off, ankle deep in liquid
mud, the coldness of which penetrated the thick puttees and boots of
the men as they made their way towards the supply depot.

The depot was a long, rambling stone building that originally
possessed one doorway. Now there were two, a Hun shell having
obligingly knocked away twenty or thirty square feet of masonry in
the end wall, while of the roof only a few rafters and tiles
remained. Tarpaulin sheets had been nailed to the woodwork to form a
temporary shelter from the driving rain. The corners of the canvas,
flapping in the wind, threatened to demolish the remaining structure,
besides allowing a steady stream of water to pour upon the earth and
lime-trodden floor.

As each man entered the building he threw one of the two gas-masks in
a corner, and in return had a complicated anti-poison-gas device
thrust unceremoniously into his hand. Three paces further on he was
greeted with half of a very dry loaf and a tin of bully-beef, while
as he emerged into the night another gift in the shape of one hundred
and fifty rounds of ball ammunition in clips was bestowed on the
already heavily weighted Tommy.

"Repairs executed while you wait!" exclaimed Ginger Anderson. "Oh,
dash! There goes my bloomin' tucker."

The half-loaf had slipped from his grasp and was rolling in the mud.
As he stooped to retrieve it the man next to him cannoned into his
unstable form, with the result that Ginger went on all-fours, plus
equipment, in the Artois mud.

"Say, sergeant," remarked the luckless private, holding up the bread.
"Wot am I ter do wi' this?"

"Get outside it when you're hungry," was the N.C.O.'s unsympathetic
reply. "If you've never got to eat stuff worse than that you can
thank your lucky stars."

"All aboard for 'Appy 'Ampstead!" shouted a wag as a line of
motor-buses, some possessing the original advertisements they had
displayed in London Town, snorted up through the blinding rain.

"Silence in the ranks!" ordered the platoon commander.

Even had his order not been given absolute silence fell upon the men
as a blinding flash stabbed the darkness, followed by an appalling
crash like a concerted roar of a dozen thunder claps. The ground
trembled. A partly demolished gable collapsed with a long drawn-out
rumble.

"We're under shell fire at last, then," remarked Second-Lieutenant
Dacres to the sergeant told off as guide to the platoon.

"Fritz's evening hate, sir," replied the N.C.O. imperturbably. "He
drops them occasionally on the high road well behind our lines on the
off chance of strafing some of our chaps. That one fell quite five
hundred yards away. You'll soon get used to it, sir. There'll be two
more coming, and then we can get a move on."

Private Setley could feel his heart beating against his ribs as he
waited. Being under shell fire for the first time was decidedly an
uncanny sensation. Dimly he wondered if he would ever get used to it.

The second and third projectiles came almost simultaneously, one
bursting a quarter of a mile away on the right, the other landing in
an already ruined farm building on the outskirts of the village.
Beams and masses of brick-bats were tossed sky-high like straws in a
gale of wind, while some of the men felt certain that they saw
portions of a field gun hurled upwards in the glare of the bursting
shell.

"That's the lot," declared the sergeant coolly. "'Tain't like what it
used to be. Fritz thinks twice about wasting heavy gun ammunition."

Silently the Tommies boarded the waiting buses. For the time being
their natural hilarity was subdued by the unwonted display of war.

"Seeking a bubble reputation at the cannon's mouth,'" declared the
ex-actor. "If it weren't for the fact that I've come a very long way
to see the fun, I, like Pistol's boy, would give all my fame for a
pot of ale and safety. What say you, Setley?"

Private Setley did not reply. Mentally he was comparing his present
position with that of a few short months ago. Then he would have
given almost anything to be "clear of the Bank." The long hours spent
in making up the "half-yearly balance" were loathsome. It was a
relief to be able to live an open-air life. Now he was about to
realise the dreams of months--yet, somehow, he hardly relished those
bursting shells. It was too one-sided to his liking--to be potted at
from an unknown distance and be unable to lift so much as a little
finger in self-defence.

"Wait till it comes to bayonet work," he mused. "Then our fellows
will give the Huns a bit of a surprise."

The detachment was really good at bayonet practice. While attached to
the Fifth Battalion at home the men had earned unstinted praise from
super-critical instructors at the way in which they prodded the
suspended sacks.

With a few exceptions all the men of No. 3 Platoon were either Derby
men or conscripts. They all had good excuses--or they individually
firmly imagined they had--why they should not "join up." It wasn't
that they were not patriotic, yet circumstances urged them to hold
back as long as possible. They groused while they awaited the
long-deferred call. The uncertainty of the whole business was the
worst part of it; but when they did join up they made the very best
of an unwanted job, went through the training like Trojans, and
longed for the order for the Front.

Socially they were a motley lot. In addition to the "former
occupations" of men already mentioned there were two solicitors, a
'Varsity graduate, an artist, a general manager, half a score of
small business men, several mechanics and labourers and two
ex-convicts--all firmly determined to have a slap at Kaiser Bill's
grey-coated Huns.

For twenty minutes the line of motor-buses jolted and swayed,
sometimes making abrupt turns to avoid deep shell holes, at others
slowing down or stopping to allow convoys proceeding in opposite
direction to pass. All the while the deafening din continued,
increasing in intensity as the distance decreased.

At length the vehicles pulled up at the end of that stage of the
journey. The stiff-limbed and sleepy men, hampered by their heavy
equipment, got down into the mud once more.

There was very little talking. Every man seemed to be too interested
in the novel form of Brock's fireworks to indulge in conversation. As
far as the eye could reach the countryside--slightly undulating--was
pin-pricked with flashes of gun-fire. Overhead star-shells of varying
colours threw a lurid glare upon the mounds of brickwork that at one
time formed populous and prosperous villages. Half a mile to the
right a church tower still stood, with a jagged hole in one angle. It
seemed marvellous that the whole structure had not collapsed. Ahead
the road ended abruptly in a mound of earth and stones thrown up by
the impact and explosion of a Hun eleven-inch shell. Almost touching
the outer edge of the crater was a Calvary--the cross standing out
sharply against the artificially lighted horizon. The crucifix was
the only object left standing within a radius of a hundred yards from
the place where the shell had dropped.

Suddenly a lurid flash, followed almost simultaneously by a roar that
outvoiced the distant rumble of the artillery, seemed to burst from
the ground within thirty paces of the platoon as they formed up to
continue their journey on the march.

The spurt of fire directed upwards at an acute angle was followed by
the hideous tearing screech of a huge projectile. A British gun, so
cleverly screened that none of the detachment was aware of its
existence, had just been fired. "It's only 'Gentle Gerty' saying good
night to the Boches, sir," explained the guide. "Now, sir, single
file, and no smoking in the ranks."

The Tommies, throwing away their cigarette ends and knocking out
their pipes, set out on the last stage of their journey. They were
now at the Front.




CHAPTER II

THE COMMUNICATION TRENCH


FOR the next fifty yards Private Ralph Setley's range of vision was
bounded in front by the steel helmet, bulging pack and hunched
shoulders of the man preceding him. Right and left nothing but fields
lavishly pitted with shell holes. The only sounds, besides the
ever-thunderous roar of the guns, the quelching of the men's boots in
the mud.

"Left incline."

The platoon wriggled sideways like an enormous worm. The reason was
soon not only apparent to the eye but to the nostrils. A mule, struck
down by a shell, was lying half buried in the mud, its legs sticking
up grotesquely in the air.

Presently the man preceding Setley seemed to disappear from view. The
Tommies in front were descending the steps leading to the long
communication trench. For nearly a mile the only way of gaining the
reserve and firing trenches was by means of the sunken gallery.

Eight feet down Setley descended. His feet no longer sank to his
ankles in mud. The nailed soles of his boots grated upon
wire-netting, that, stretched across the seemingly endless line of
"duck-boards," prevented the men slipping on the lively pieces of
boarding into the slime that formed the major portion of the floor of
the trench.

On either hand the stiff, slimy walls of clay, topped by rows of
sandbags, threatened to collapse and bury the users of the narrow and
tortuous way, for in order to prevent the communicating trench being
enfiladed by hostile fire it was a continued succession of twists and
turns.

Still the rain poured down remorselessly upon the great-coated
Tommies. Here and there portions of the parapet had slipped bodily
into the trench, necessitating a tedious clamber over a heap of moist
clay of the consistency of soft putty.

Before a hundred yards of the narrow way had been traversed George
Anderson, who was immediately in front of Setley, stepped
incautiously upon the edge of one of the duck-boards. In a trice the
section of woodwork tilted, deporting the man up to his thighs in mud
and water, while Ralph, stopping abruptly to avoid the tilted end of
the board, was cannoned into by the man behind who happened to be
Private Alderhame. The next instant both were sprawling on top of the
luckless Anderson, driving his writhing body still deeper into the
mud.

With difficulty Ralph and the ex-actor extricated themselves. Ginger
was in a worse predicament, for until his comrades gripped his arm
and dragged him out by main force he was unable to disengage himself
from the clammy embrace of the tenacious clay.

"I came out 'ere for sojering," remarked the aggrieved man. "Not to
go in for mudlarkin'. I could get plenty of that at Gravesend."

"Phit! phit!" Something, buzzing like an angry bee, slapped viciously
into the mud wall a few inches above Setley's head. Then another,
glancing off the steel helmet of the still grumbling Anderson, sent
the man staggering into Ralph's arms.

"Keep down as you pass this place," shouted a hoarse voice through
the darkness. "The parapet's blown in."

A gap nearly twenty yards in length confirmed the speaker's words.
Through this exposed section rifle bullets were whizzing. Apparently
the Huns had marked the spot during the hours of daylight and had
lashed some rifles to posts, so trained that at fifteen hundred yards
they could command this part of the communication trench by night.

The platoon obeyed smartly, yet resentfully. It was bad enough to
have to walk through mud. To crawl on one's hands and knees was about
the limit.

"Way for the wounded!"

The men, most of them still in a prone position, hugged the slippery
side of the trench, peering through the darkness at the as yet
strange sight.

"Good luck, you blighters!" exclaimed the first of the wounded
Tommies, a tall cadaverous man, with his head roughly bandaged and
his arm in a sling. "You're going to a hot shop, s'welp me. Fifteen
of our chaps copped it in ten minutes. Never mind; it's for Blighty I
am."

The next casualty--a man with his left hand blown off at the
wrist--was groaning and cursing as he passed, staggering like a
drunken man and paying scant heed to the warning to keep well down.

Then two more, borne on stretchers. The knuckles of the bearers
rasped the equipment of the Wheatshires, so narrow was the space in
which to pass, while in order to cross the "unhealthy" section of the
trench the men had to deposit the stretchers on the duck-boards and
drag them sleigh fashion.

Three men, hobbling, using their rifles as crutches, completed the
pageant of pain.

"Copped it proper," explained one of the wounded. "Never 'ad as much
as a blinkin' chance to fire my blessed rifle."

"Wouldn't 'ave been much use if you did, Tommy," rejoined his comrade
with a laugh. "You knowed as 'ow you're the rottenest shot in the
battalion."

"No need to rub that in afore a lot of strangers," retorted the
other. "'Op it; I'll race you to the dressing-station. No more dashed
first line trenches for us for a bit, thank 'eaven. Foot it, you
blighter, afore your leg gets stiff."

The twain vanished into the darkness, leaving the dank, reeking
odours of dirt and sweat in the muggy air.

Another hundred yards and a voice rang out:

"Is that the ration party?"

"No," replied the sergeant. "Reliefs for the Wheatshires."

"Good luck to 'em, then!" rejoined the speaker. "But where the deuce
are the rations? There's no barrage fire on now, an' we ain't seen no
grub for two whole days."

"Keep your heads down, lads."

The caution was hardly necessary. Each man was bent almost double.
Over the parapet on the left a whiz-bang exploded, sending a shower
of dirt upon the soldiers' steel helmets. Trench mortars were lobbing
their deadly missiles into the British second-line trenches.

"Here you are," explained the guide as the head of the platoon
emerged into a short "bay" or section of the winding trench. "Two men
to each dug-out, sir; t'other fellows will show 'em the ropes better.
C.O.'s dug-out is fifty yards further on, sir."

"Stick to me, Setley," whispered Alderhame.

"Will if I can," replied Ralph. "They're telling us off in pairs."

"You two in there," ordered a strange sergeant, indicating what
appeared to be a glorified rabbit-hole burrowed out of the side of
the trench. "New chums, mates," he continued, calling to the as yet
invisible denizens of the subterranean dwelling.

"Come in," said a youthful voice. "Mind your head. I thought it was
Dixon with the grub. Don't keep the curtain held back longer than
usual. It isn't healthy, you know."

Down nine steps cut into the slippery clay, each succeeding step
being a little more like liquid slime than the preceding one, Setley
made his way, the top edge of his pack rubbing against the cross
timbers of the roof of the obliquely sloping tunnel. His hand came in
contact with a clammy ground-sheet, termed by courtesy a curtain.
Pulling it aside he had his first vision of the interior of a
dug-out--his temporary abode during his "turn" in the trenches. The
excavation measured roughly twelve feet by nine, its height being
barely sufficient to allow a tall man to stand upright. At the end
furthest from the entrance was a stove fashioned out of an old tin
bucket and provided with a decidedly inefficient chimney, since most
of the fumes wafted into the dug-out. On the stove a "billy" was
boiling. Stuck on the end of a flat piece of iron projecting from the
wall was a guttering candle, the sole illumination, its yellow light
being hardly powerful enough to penetrate the smoky atmosphere.
Against a horizontal slab of wood reposed six rifles, while on
slightly raised benches against the side walls were bundles of damp
straw, rolled blankets and kit-bags.

"That's right," continued the voice that had bidden the strangers
enter. "Sling your gear on that bench, and please don't trouble to
wipe your boots. We didn't bother to polish the floor this morning."

Ridding himself of his rifle and pack, an example that Alderhame was
quick to follow, Ralph turned his attention to his facetious new
comrade.

By this time Setley had grown more accustomed to the dim light. Half
lying, half sitting upon one of the benches was a mere lad of about
nineteen or twenty, burly of figure, round-faced except for a
pronounced hollow in his cheeks, and with dark brown eyes in which
lurked a suspicion of constant mental strain. He had discarded his
tunic, revealing a Cardigan jacket. Otherwise he was fully dressed,
even to his muddy boots, from which the warm vapour rose like steam
from the back of an overworked horse on a cold day. Pulled well down
over his head was a grey woollen cap, while wrapped loosely round his
neck was a khaki-coloured scarf.

"In the absence of a mutual friend to introduce us," remarked the
recumbent occupant of the sleeping-place, "I suppose we must do the
honours ourselves. My name's Penfold--No. 142857, which is jolly easy
to remember if you know anything about recurring decimals. What's
yours?"

Setley told him, adding gratuitously that he was a bank clerk.

"That so?" remarked Penfold. "I was in a shipping office. And your
chum?"

"Alderhame is my name," replied the actor. "My profession? Well, I
used to tread the boards."

"Strikes me you'll still tread the boards and feel jolly sick at
doing it before long," rejoined Penfold with a laugh. "Duck-boards I
mean. We were to have been relieved at eight this evening. Another
regiment is supposed to take our place, but they didn't turn up. Why,
I don't know; there wasn't much of a barrage this evening--and now
the infernal racket is starting again."

Heavy shells exploding in front and behind the lines of trenches
shook the dug-out until the timbering seemed in imminent danger of
giving way.

For some moments there was silence in the underground refuge. The
continuous crash without was appalling.

"Is this place shell-proof?" asked Alderhame.

"Nothing is," replied Penfold nonchalantly. "A direct hit with a big
shell and it's 'Gone West' with the three of us. Hullo!"

The waterproof-sheet was drawn aside and a red-faced sergeant, the
moisture running in rivulets from his steel helmet, thrust his head
into the reeking dug-out.

"Look slippy, you chaps!" he exclaimed. "Every man is wanted. There's
a massed attack developing."




CHAPTER III

THE NIGHT ATTACK


SNATCHING up their rifles the three men hurried from the dug-out,
nearly colliding with the rest of their chums who were returning at
the first alarm to get their equipment. "Follow me," exclaimed
Penfold. "Keep well down."

At the fifth or sixth step along the tortuous communication trench
Setley trod on something not so yielding as mud, but comparatively
soft. He stooped and felt the object with his hand. His fingers came
in contact with a human face.

"There's a man lying here!" he called out to Penfold, who was a few
paces in front.

"I know," replied his new chum. "He's been there for the last three
hours. Our fellows haven't had time to bring him in yet. Don't worry
about that; you'll soon get used to it."

Setley hurried on, wondering whether he would ever get accustomed to
the horrors of the trenches. The seemingly stony indifference with
which Penfold had spoken jarred on his sensitive nerves. Somehow the
realization did not fit in with the anticipation of what war really
was. He could not help asking himself why nations should set about to
deliberately exterminate each other merely for the lust of
conquest--a wholesale slaughter by the most deadly scientific
instrument that human ingenuity could devise.

His disjointed reveries were interrupted by Penfold being hurled
violently backwards, his hunched shoulders striking Ralph violently
in the chest. The two men staggered backwards, accompanied by showers
of mud, stones, and displaced sand-bags, all silhouetted against the
glare of an exploding shell. Three of the Wheatshires preceding
Penfold were hurled bodily into the air, subsiding with sickening
thuds upon the soft ground. One writhed furiously, groaning dismally
the while; the others were mere lumps of clay fashioned in God's own
image, but now hideously mangled.

"On!" exclaimed Penfold breathlessly. "Don't wait. The
stretcher-bearers will be along for that fellow in half a shake."

Across a gap in the sand-bagged wall the men hurried. They could hear
the hiss of the stream of bullets from a machine-gun. It seemed so
close that Setley and Alderhame flung themselves flat.

"What are you hanging back for?" shouted a sergeant. "How the deuce
can the rest of the men get by when you're blocking the road? Push
along, both of you!"

Thus abjured the twain, fearing the scathing words of the N.C.O. more
than the whistling bullets, slid over the mound of displaced
sand-bags into the crater of the recently exploded shell, and
scrambled up the other side.

Twenty paces more and Setley found himself in the front line trench.
Almost mechanically he mounted the fire-step, rested the barrel of
his rifle between two spaced sand-bags that formed a loophole, and
waited.

"Here they come!" shouted an excited voice.

Standing out clearly against the glare of half a dozen star-shells
came on dense masses of German infantry. The Huns advanced slowly,
almost hesitatingly. There were no shouts of "Deutschland Ã¼ber
alles!" that characterized the earlier attacks. The words were a
hollow mockery--and the Huns knew it. They had now a wholesome
respect for the British Tommy. It was mainly fear of their officers,
who kept at the heels of their men and held revolvers ready to shoot
down any who refused to charge, that made the attack develop.

In front came two men, masked and bearing metal cylinders resembling
exaggerated packs upon their shoulders. In place of a rifle and
bayonet they held a length of flexible hose. The Huns were about to
use liquid fire in their attempt to oust the British from their
trenches.

Supporting these perambulating torches were a dozen or more bombers,
while close at their heels came men armed with rifles and bayonets.
With the exception of the mud and numerous shell-craters there was
little in the way of obstacles to impede their advance, for almost
the whole of the wire entanglements fronting the British parapet had
been blown away by shell-fire. Setley's impression at the
unaccustomed sight was that the brunt of the attack was about to fall
on his immediate front.

Suddenly the whole length of the British trench burst into a line of
crackling flame as the Tommies commenced independent rapid fire. Some
maxims, skilfully concealed in sand-bagged emplacements, added to the
din with their quick pop-pop-pop.

The Huns, erroneously trusting that their heavy guns had battered the
British trenches into shapeless mounds, and thinking that the Tommies
had been either blown to fragments by the terrific artillery
bombardment or had been compelled to seek refuge in their dug-outs,
were met by the full blast of the rifle and machine-gun fire.

Ralph was soon surprised to find that he was slipping another clip of
cartridges into the magazine of his rifle. He was now as cool as a
cucumber. The months of infantry training had not been thrown away.
With a visible enemy facing him he realized that the time had come
when he could strike a blow for King and Country, instead of being
subjected to shell-fire from a distant and unseen foe without being
able to raise a hand in self-defence. The attack was doomed to
failure from the start. One of the men bearing the liquid fire
apparatus was on his face, his head and shoulders buried in mud,
while his diabolical contrivance, which had evidently been perforated
by a bullet, had taken fire and was blazing furiously. The bombers
hurled their missiles prematurely, most of the bombs falling short;
while the infantry, mown down in heaps, wavered, the survivors
beginning to give way.

Above the rattle of musketry a whistle rang out loud and clear.

"Come on, boys!" shouted an officer, leaping on to the parapet, to
topple backwards with a bullet through his brain.

Undeterred, the Wheatshires poured over the shattered breastwork of
sand-bags. With an inspiring British cheer the infantry surged ver
the top like a huge, irresistible breaker.

The opportune moment for delivering a counter-attack had arrived.

Well spent had been those months of active training. The Wheatshires,
every man a passable athlete, literally swarmed over the parapet.
With their bayonets gleaming in the ruddy glare and preceded by the
regimental bombers the khaki-clad troops, dexterously threading their
way through the gaps in the barbed wire, charged irresistibly against
the already broken enemy.

A wave of thrilling enthusiasm swept over Private Setley. The chance
of actually doing something, of getting clear of the imprisoning
walls of slimy mire and coming to grips with the Hun had come. The
studiously polite and law-abiding bank-clerk was transformed into a
fighting Tommy. The lust of primeval combat was upon him. He saw red.
Of what happened during the next two minutes Setley had but a faint
and hazy notion. Bombs hurled by the retreating Huns fell around him.
Once the blast from an exploding missile lifted his steel helmet from
his head. He remembered putting it straight with his left hand and
noticing that the fingers were covered with a dark, moist, warm
fluid.

A man, keeping pace with him, suddenly dropped his rifle and fell on
his face. Setley leapt over the slightly inclined bayonet and held
on, the desire to stop and assist a fallen comrade being hardly
existent. For the time being his sole desire was to overtake one of
those field-grey forms showing dimly through the smoke.

The enemy first-line trenches at last--and the Huns were making a
stand. A machine-gun, one of many, was pumping out nickel almost on
Setley's immediate front. Hostile bombers were redoubling their
efforts. In cold blood the lad would have thought twice, perhaps many
times, before facing that deadly menace, but carried away in the mad
rush he pressed forward, scarce noticing the weight of his rifle and
bayonet.

A severed, coiled strand of barbed wire caught the puttee of his left
foot. With a vicious jerk he freed himself from the encumbrance,
leaving half a yard of mud-plastered cloth upon the sharp barb. Two
yards in front of him was a burly German bomber with a bomb poised
ready to hurl.

Regardless of the fact that the explosion of the missile would to an
almost certainty annihilate him, the Hun threw the bomb. Setley
caught it on the flat blade of his bayonet and threw it aside, where
it burst ten yards to the right under a tall, bearded Prussian.

The next instant the thrower received six inches of cold steel right
in the centre of his chest. Setley had made a mistake. It was a
matter of considerable difficulty to withdraw the blade. He
remembered too late the warning of the drill-instructors--when
delivering a body thrust aim below the ribs.

Before he could disengage the steel another German commenced a
furious blow with the butt-end of his rifle. In the midst of the
swing of the weapon a shot rang out within a few inches of Setley's
ear, and the Hun, with a curious look of surprise on his sullen
features, staggered forward. The descending rifle-butt struck
Setley's helmet a glancing blow and, missing his left shoulder, sank
deeply into the mud.

"So much for Buckingham: off with his head," yelled Alderhame, as he
ejected the still smoking cartridge-case from the breach of his
rifle. "How's that, my festive?"

"Thanks," replied Setley briefly; then over the hostile parapet the
two comrades surged, bending low as they crouched behind their ready
bayonets.

The deep and narrow German trench was crowded with men--dead,
wounded, and living. Some of the latter were putting up a stiff
fight, like wild animals at bay. Others, with the dismal and
monotonous whine of "Mercy, Kamerad!" were holding their hands high
above their heads, the bombs taking toll of brave men and cowards
alike.

Following at the heels of two of the Wheatshires' bombers, Setley,
Alderhame, George Anderson, and two others, made their way along a
traverse, the riflemen firing at the side of the bombers. At
intervals the latter stopped to hurl their deadly missiles down the
steep and steeply shelving entrances to the German dug-outs.

Rounding a sand-bagged traverse the party entered a bay in which was
a machine-gun, with its crew of dead and dying lying around the
silent weapon. A few paces further on a tall, bearded Hun barred the
way.

"Hands up!" yelled Ginger.

The man threw down his rifle and complied. As the Tommies surged past
Anderson took possession of the discarded weapon and tossed it over
the parapet.

"Keep 'em up!" he continued, addressing his prisoner. "A little of
that'll do you no 'arm. You bide 'ere till you're told to shift."

A shot rang out, and one of the British bombers dropped. His
companion hurled a bomb, while Setley and Alderhame pushed forward
towards a temporary barrier of sand-bags hastily piled on the floor
of the trench. Beyond were three Huns, one of whom had just fired the
fatal shot; but the avenging bomb had already done its work.

Standing on the parados was a captain of the Wheatshires.

"Back, men!" he ordered. "Don't get out of touch with the rest of the
company. Secure your prisoners and retire."

"Retire, be hanged!" muttered George. "Wot's to prevent us going on
to Berlin? Eh, you treacherous swine, wot's the game?"

He clapped his hand to his ear. One portion of the lobe was missing.
The man he had taken prisoner had drawn a small revolver from his
pocket and had fired at five paces at his captor while the latter's
back was turned.

With a yell Ginger rushed at the recreant Hun. Once more the man's
hands were raised above his head, and again the dolorous "Mercy,
Kamerad; me haf wife and six children!"

"Liar!" shouted the now furious Tommy, giving the treacherous Boche a
generous amount of cold steel. "You've a widow an' six orphans!"

Reluctantly, the Wheatshires quitted the hostile trenches and made
their way back across No Man's Land. In many cases their officers had
to push them towards their own lines. Having made good their footing
in the German defences, the Tommies did not relish the idea of
abandoning the ground. It did not occur to them that the captured
trench would form a dangerous salient, liable to be enfiladed and
levelled flat with hostile shells before it could be properly
consolidated.

"How about grub?" enquired Penfold, as the men regained the safety of
their own lines. "There's no barrage now? Why can't they bring our
tommy up to us?"

"Could do with a good meal myself," said Sefton. "Fortunately, we
were served out with bully-beef before we arrived. You can have some
of mine."

"Thanks, awfully," replied his new chum. "I'll accept; but, remember,
it's bad policy. Generosity is all very well, but here it's each man
for himself in the grub line. You can't blame a half-starving fellow
sneaking any food that he finds lying about, you know."

"How is it that you're short of rations?" asked Alderhame.

"Goodness only knows. The Huns were going it pretty hot all day and
during the earlier part of this evening. Perhaps our ration party
copped it. Everything has to be brought up by hand in this section of
the line," replied Penfold. "Well, let's foot it, before the guns
start again. The Boches will be pretty wild after this little
affair."

Mingled with a jostling throng of exultant Tommies and dejected
prisoners, the three made their way along the communication trench to
their dug-out.

"What luck!" ejaculated Penfold, stopping short at a heap of
disordered sand-bags and splintered timber that marked the site of
their temporary abode. "Our dug-out has been properly strafed. We
would have all gone West by this time if we'd been inside. But I say,
you fellows; what price grub, now?"




CHAPTER IV

GRUB


PENFOLD spoke of his escape without emotion. He had been long enough
check by jowl with death to express no surprise. He had merely
remarked that it was a lucky chance that the occupants of the shelled
dug-out had not been inside when the heavy howitzer missile had
demolished it. What did seriously annoy him was the loss of the
promised food.

Ralph Setley, although by this time ravenously hungry, was fervently
thankful for his escape. Already the reaction of the raid into the
German trenches was beginning to tell. Shorn of excitement of the
wild rush over the top, the horrors of that nocturnal excursion rose
up in his mind. The knowledge that he had bayoneted a
fellow-creature, although he were an enemy and a brutal Hun, worried
him.

"Suppose the fellow would have done me in if I hadn't got him first,"
he soliloquized. Then, aloud:

"What are you jabbering about, Alderhame?"

The former actor was stamping up and down the duck-boards, now
encrusted with a thin coating of ice:--


    "Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
    Thou dost not bite so nigh
    As benefits forgot."


"That's _As You Like It!_ chum. It aptly describes our condition.
Horribly cold, and benefits in the shape of bully-beef gone, though
not forgotten. Where's our next lodging?"

The stream of prisoners and wounded Tommies had now dwindled.
Penfold, addressing a sergeant, stated his case.

"D'ye think I'm a Cook's tourist guide?" snapped the N.C.O. "Turn in
where you can. There are a good many half empty dug-outs now, I'm
thinking."

A shell shrieked overhead. The Huns were putting up a barrage, the
shrapnel falling amongst their own men, who, prisoners in the hands
of the British, were being escorted to the "Advance cages."

"In here," said Penfold, making a dive for the nearest entrance.
Alderhame followed close at his heels, then Setley and George
Anderson, the latter still grousing at the loss of a quarter of an
inch of his ear.

"Anyone at home?" enquired Penfold.

He pushed aside the covering to the sloping tunnel and entered the
dug-out, which in point of size and contents was much the same as his
demolished mud-hole--the damp steaming straw, the pungent fumes of
the charcoal brazier, the moisture dripping through the timber-shored
roof, and the guttering candle--a typical Tommy's barrack-room on the
Somme Front.

Seated on an upturned ammunition-case and with his feet resting on
another tin box, in order to keep them out of the slime, was a young,
pale-faced, dark-haired soldier He was busily engaged in writing with
an indelible pencil certain words of deeper violet hue, betraying the
fact that the paper shared the general failing of the subterranean
abode--it was moist: uncommonly so.

So engrossed was the writer that for some moments he "carried on"
with his task. Then looking up, and seeing strange faces, he
exclaimed, in a lisping drawl:

"I say, you've made a mistake. This isn't your caboodle."

"No mistake, chummy," replied Penfold firmly. "We've been shelled
out. We crave your hospitality. How many men in this dug-out?"

"There were eight this morning," replied the youth:

"Where are the others?"

"Ask me another."

"I will," rejoined Penfold, depositing his rifle on a bench. "Have
they left any grub?"

"Wish they had," was the grim answer. Then, with more eagerness than
he had hitherto shown, he asked: "Have you any food? I haven't had a
bite since this morning. Finished the whole of my ration, including
jam, thinking that the fresh stuff would be in--but it isn't!"

"You're welcome to a share of ours, laddie," remarked Alderhame,
"which happens to be nixes."

Ralph sat down on a bundle of straw, having first appropriated the
late occupant's pack as a pillow. He was feeling horribly tired. His
feet and hands were numbed with the cold. His saturated clothes were
throwing off wisps of muggy vapour. Even a huge rat pattering on the
muddy floor and scampering through the straw hardly troubled him, and
a few hours previously he would have gone twenty yards to avoid one.

In his drowsiness he found himself contemplating the latest of his
many new comrades.

"I'll bet that chap's a Jew," he thought.

Setley was right in his surmise. Sidney Bartlett was the grandson of
a Polish refugee who had become a naturalized Englishman and,
dropping the name of Bariniski, had successfully engaged in business
in Birmingham. Like many of the Hebrew race, young Bartlett was a
patriot and a staunch supporter of the land of his adoption. When the
call to arms came he rallied to the Colours, only to be sent back
until he was sufficiently old to serve in His Majesty's Forces. Only
three years previously Sidney was at a large day school, and there
occurred an incident that was to influence his conduct at the Somme
Front.

For some weeks the lad was persistently absent from school. The head
master constantly received notes to the effect that Sidney was kept
at home through domestic troubles, in which a grandmother figured
largely. The caligraphy arousing his suspicions, the head wrote to
the lad's father, and then the "cat was out of the bag."

One afternoon Bartlett Senior, accompanied by his errant son, came to
the head master's study.

"Now, Sidney," said his sire, solemnly, "I vant you to tell de
trut'--de whole trut', mind. Later on, in bizness, Sidney, you may
tell a lie; but now you must tell de trut'."

Utterly worn out, Setley fell asleep--a slumber broken with dreams of
the exciting episodes of the last few hours. Rats wandered at will
over his couch of straw; vermin of other kind swarmed everywhere. His
companions, too hungry to sleep, sat up and smoked, recounting
anecdotes on almost every topic except the war. Without the guns
thundered incessantly, but the duel was chiefly betwixt the
artillery, and the trenches were left almost untouched.

"I'm off to see if I can't find some grub," declared Penfold. "Who's
game?"

Ginger Anderson volunteered to accompany him with the greatest
alacrity. It was better than sitting still in a damp dug-out with
hunger gnawing at one's vitals. Alderhame and Bartlett also expressed
their willingness to take part in the foraging expedition.

"I reckon as if we do 'ave any luck," remarked Ginger, "the rations
will arrive directly we do, and all our work'll be for nothing."

"So much the better," rejoined Penfold.

"How about Setley?"

"Let him sleep on," suggested the ex-actor:


    "Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs
    Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
    And hush'd with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber."


"'Buzzing night-flies' sounds poetical," remarked Penfold. "Poetic
licence shows tactful discretion in this case. Come along, you
fellows."

The four adventurers sallied forth to beg, borrow, or steal something
in the edible line. It was freezing so hard that the trench-boards
were immovably cemented in solid mud of the hardness of stone.

"Thank goodness we weren't warned for the wiring party," whispered
Penfold. "Black as pitch, and as cold as charity. Hist! What do you
make of that?"

He pointed to a faint ray of light emanating from an oblique shaft of
a dug-out--that of the major of his company. The opening was for
ventilating purposes, and was fitted with a piece of corrugated iron
to prevent the water making its way into the underground room. From
the shaft came the unmistakable odour of roast meat.

One by one the men reconnoitred, and withdrew to a safe distance to
deliberate.

"Regular old food-hog," declared Alderhame. "Not only is he about to
wolf a pound of meat, but there's a pudding and a packet of sausages.
Presumably, his missis has sent him out a hamper."

"Too much for one man, albeit a field officer," decided Penfold.
"Lads, we must have some of that grub!"

"'Ow?" enquired Anderson. "Yer can't just pop in an' say, friendly
like: 'Wot cheer, major, old sport; 'ow abart it? Can yer?"

"Can't we lure him out?" suggested Alderhame.

"We might; but what's the use?" rejoined Penfold. "These officers'
dug-outs have doors, and ten to one he'll lock it if he goes far from
his grub."

"You get him out," said Sidney Bartlett. "I'll do the rest. All we
want is a light pole. There are some in the next traverse. Lash a
bayonet to one end and spear what we can through that hole."

"Sounds feasible," agreed Penfold. "Nip off and get the gear ready."

In a short space of time Bartlett had rigged up his improvised
fishing-tackle.

"Now," he said, "I'm ready. You carry on, Penfold."

Drawing his woollen cap well over his eyes and turning up the collar
of his greatcoat as high as possible, Penfold knocked at the door of
the Major's dug-out.

"Well?" enquired a deep muffled voice testily.

"Colonel's compliments, sir," announced the mendacious private, in an
assumed tone. "He wants you to report to him at once upon the number
of men left in this section of the trench."

Grumbling, the Major issued from his subterranean retreat, carefully
locked the door, and set out to find the company sergeant-major, in
order to obtain the supposedly urgent information.

Before he returned the four raiders were scurrying back to their
dug-out, each with his mouth full of cold sausage, while Alderhame
retained a painful impression of an otherwise appetizing repast in
the shape of a cut on his cheek, caused by the end of the pole as the
elated Sidney swiftly withdrew it with the prized booty impaled upon
the bayonet.

"Where's my first-aid dressing?" enquired the ex-actor, with mock
concern.


    "'And patches will I get unto these scars
    And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.'"


"Hardly good enough for Blighty," said Penfold, with a laugh. "My
word, won't the Major be in a tear when he misses his sausages!"

"Let him," said Bartlett. "He can only blame the rats."

"Halt! Who goes there?" exclaimed the hoarse voice of a sentry in the
next traverse.

"Engineers' ration party," was the reply. "Is this the Royal
Engineers?"

"Rather!" replied the ready Penfold. "Dump 'em down; we'll fetch
them."

Out of the neighbouring dug-outs poured other Tommies. Without having
any suspicion of the ruse played upon them, the ration party handed
over the stores intended for a company of the Royal Engineers, who
were engaged in tunnelling on the left of the Wheatshires' trenches.
Almost in the nick of time a famine was averted at the expense of the
sappers and miners. But, as Penfold remarked, it was each man for
himself when it came to a case of semi-starvation.




CHAPTER V

THE EXPEDITION TO NO MAN'S LAND


"TURN out, you chaps! You're warned for duty in the first-line
trench."

With the sergeant's words ringing in his ears Ralph Setley arose from
his uncomfortable bed. A candle was still guttering. It was not yet
dawn. The Huns' protracted shelling had ceased until the time for
their customary morning "hate."

The rest of the occupants of his dug-out were engaged upon their
morning "toilet"--the rite consisting of cleaning and oiling their
rifles. Washing was out of the question, and as they had turned in
fully dressed, including great-coats and boots, there was nothing
further to be done beyond cooking breakfast.

Thanks to the blunder of the rationing party the men regaled
themselves with slices of bacon, bread not more than three days old,
and tea of exceptionally strong brew. The bacon was gritty, which was
not to be wondered at, seeing that the men had been under shell-fire
almost the whole way to the trenches.

Alderhame was in high spirits notwithstanding he had had but a few
hours' sleep. There was a touch of the far-off "green-room" days, as
he laid his hand on Setley's shoulder.

"Come on, laddie," he said. "Let's survey the radiant morn:--


    "This battle fares like to the morning's war,
        When dying clouds contend with glowing light;
    What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
        Can neither call it perfect day nor night."


Viewed in the pale grey dawn, the dreary stretch of No Man's Land was
robbed of most of its ghastly details. Here and there, often in
heaps, huddled corpses dressed in mud-stained field-grey testified to
the accuracy of the British rifle and machine-gun fire. Further away
lay the trenches that the Wheatshires had visited so effectively.
Already Hun wiring parties had been out, and the shattered stakes and
snake-like coils of severed barbed wire had been replaced by new.
Almost in the front row of wire a black, white, and red striped
flag--the emblem of Germany--fluttered in the faint breeze.

Setley could now understand why the order for recall had been given
when the regiment was in possession of this section of the Hun
trenches, for dominating the advance works was a strong redoubt,
known to the Wheatshires by the somewhat ominous name of Pumpnickel.
For the last three weeks the Engineers--the same company whose
rations had been appropriated by the Wheatshires--had been engaged in
driving a mine-gallery in the direction of this earthwork-fortress.
Great things were promised when the time came to spring the mine and
send Pumpnickel Redoubt flying in the air.

"I mean to get that flag," declared Bartlett. "I'll go out to-night
and bring it in."

"Wouldn't if I were you," said Penfold. "It's a sort of booby-trap, I
wouldn't mind betting. Something that, when moved, explodes a
grenade."

"I'll risk that," declared the lad grimly. "The Boches mustn't flaunt
their colours in our faces. I was----"

Something "pinged" on the rounded surface of his steel helmet. A
watchful sniper had seized his chance. Only by an inch had Sidney
escaped death, for had the bullet struck the steel squarely instead
of glancing off the convex surface the head-gear would not have
withstood the impact.

"Are you young fools looking for trouble?" growled Sergeant Ferris,
the N.C.O. who had routed them from the dug-out. "Keep under cover,
and use a trench periscope if you want to enjoy the scenery."

"Thanks for the tip, sergeant," said George Anderson. "Sorry I can't
offer yer a seegar, sergeant; I left me case on the grand pianner at
'ome; but 'ave a fag--a genuine Day's March Nearer 'Ome' brand."

The N.C.O. took the proffered cigarette and lit it slowly and
deliberately.

"Are we on Wiring Party to-night, sergeant?" asked Ginger.

"Not as I know of," was the reply. "Why?"

"'Cause my pal 'ere is goin' to get 'old of that striped
bed-cover"--jerking his thumb in the direction of the German
flag--"an' I'm a-goin' with 'im; ain't I, Sid, ole sport?"

"Then you'll have to be sharp about it," remarked Sergeant Ferris.
"The mine is to be sprung at 3.30 a.m. We're over the top again; this
time there'll be no going back, if all goes well. We ought to advance
four hundred yards and consolidate the position. So now you know. Go
for the flag at your own risk, chums; but don't forget. Be back
before three, or you'll stand a sure and certain chance of going to
Kingdom Come with a couple o' hundred perishing Boches for company."

During the rest of the day nothing happened beyond the customary
routine of trench life, combined with the monotonous occurrence of
casualties.

"Are you still of the same mind, Bartlett?" enquired Alderhame, as
darkness set in.

"Rather," was the firm reply.

"Then I'm going with you."

"And I," added Setley.

"No, you don't," objected Anderson. "Two's quite enough for this
blessed job. Look 'ere: if I don't come back, there's a letter in my
pack wot I wants sent 'ome. Anythink else you can 'ave, fags an' all.
I'm going to 'ave a doss. Turn me out at twelve."

"Rum chap," commented Alderhame, indicating the soundly sleeping
Ginger. "A regular rough diamond, always ready to do a pal a good
turn."

"By the by," said Setley. "You did me a good turn when my bayonet got
hung up, although you nearly split the drum of my ear when you fired
and brought down the fellow who was about to club me."

"Every little helps," said Alderhame. "Lucky for you the Hun wasn't
on my left side."

"Why?" enquired Ralph curiously.

"Simply because I'm stone-blind in my left eye," replied the ex-actor
composedly. "I was passed for Class A just the same. When I told the
doctor he merely remarked: 'Oh, left eye, eh? Well, a man almost
invariably shoots with his right eye!' 'I'd sooner shoot with a
rifle, sir!' I said. 'And so you shall, my man!' he rejoined,
laughing at my repartee; so he marked me down for general service,
and here I am. I'm not at all sorry. If I come through this business
it will be something to be proud of, you know."

All was quiet between the opposing lines. The Huns, realizing the
superior weight and volume of fire of the British guns, wisely
refrained from inviting them; while the latter, massed until they
were practically wheel to wheel, were silent, concentrating their
energies for a terrific tornado of shell as a prelude to the rush of
the infantry "over the top."

At midnight the two volunteers were roused from their slumbers.

"Still of the same mind?" enquired Penfold.

"Not 'arf," replied Ginger, while Bartlett nodded his head and
shrugged his shoulders in the characteristic way that he had
inherited from his Polish ancestors.

"We'll speed the parting guests," declared Alderhame, with a forced
attempt at joviality. "Me lud, your carriage waits."

"Chuck it!" retorted Anderson. "'Ere, gimme me baynit. Look arter me
rifle till I comes back. Now, Sidney, old sport."

Setley, Penfold, and the ex-actor accompanied them to the front
trench. Like men about to dive into icy-cold water the two raiders
paused, with one foot on the fire-step; then without a word both
wriggled silently and cautiously over the parapet. Ten seconds later
the intense darkness had swallowed them up.

Braving the piercing cold the three men awaited their comrades'
return, peering at intervals over the top of the parapet and
straining their ears to catch the faintest sound of their movements.
Twenty minutes passed, but neither by sight nor sound did the twain
betray their presence in the forbidding No Man's Land.

Suddenly the darkness was pierced by a short shriek of mingled pain
and rage, the thud of blows falling on some soft object, and the
unmistakable squelching of many feet in the tenacious slime.

"Good heavens!" ejaculated Penfold. "They've been done in. Who's
going out, lads?"

"Not much use at present," objected Alderhame. "The Huns are on the
alert. When things have quieted down a bit, I'll go."

"That's the spirit, lad," said Sergeant Ferris, who had joined the
party of watchers. "Discretion is what's wanted now. We've chucked
away two men over this business already, and all for the sake of a
dirty German flag."

Another twenty minutes passed. The Huns could be heard talking
excitedly in their trenches, but the distance was too great to
distinguish their words. Setley was of the opinion that Sidney was a
prisoner. He fancied that he heard the lad's voice, but he could not
be certain.

"If they'd got Ginger," declared Penfold, "there would be no doubt of
hearing his voice. Well, lads, are you fit?"

The three men began to remove great-coats and everything likely to
impede their movements. Suddenly Setley snatched up his rifle.

"What's up, now?" asked the sergeant.

"Something moving," declared the lad.

The sentries, too, held their arms in readiness to open fire.

"Steady on, chums," whispered Ginger. "Don't let rip. It's only me."

He wriggled over the parapet and dropped inertly upon the fire-step.
For some moments he lay like one dead, his comrades forbearing to
question him.

Presently he raised his head, and extending his hand showed a closely
rolled bundle that was indistinguishable in the darkness.

"I've got it, mates," he announced. "It's the flag we went out for.
Got me baynit into one bloke's throat, an' didn't 'e scream."

"Where's Sidney?" asked Penfold.

"Ain't 'e back? I lost touch with 'im. 'Ere, I'm off out again!"

"No, you don't," declared Sergeant Ferris firmly. "You'll be put
under arrest if you attempt it. You're done up. Now, you fellows, if
you're going you'd best look sharp about it. Take a rope, in case you
find young Bartlett. Slip it round his heels, and drag him in if he
cannot crawl."

In spite of his resolution, Setley's heart was literally in his mouth
when he found himself in contact with the slime of No Man's Land. At
ten paces he had lost all idea of the whereabouts of his companions.
Guided by the relative position of the Pole star, now shining feebly
through the drifting smoke, he crawled slowly but steadily onwards
towards the spot where the coveted flag had been planted.

At frequent intervals star-shells burst overhead, throwing a
blinding, ghostly glare upon the crater-pitted ground. Their
appearance was the signal for Setley to throw himself flat upon the
ground. The slightest movement would have resulted in a machine-gun
being trained upon him. With his face pillowed on his arm--it was the
only way of preventing a smothering acquaintance with the
evil-smelling Somme mud--he was unable to take advantage of the light
to look for his companions. Whether they were ahead, behind, or had
relinquished their efforts, he was totally in ignorance.

Presently his hand came in contact with some hard cold substance. It
was the face of a frozen corpse--that of a Hun, judging by the
cloth-swathed helmet. The man was obviously a sniper, for he had on
him a stock of candles, food and drink, and a pair of binoculars.
Evidently he was making, under cover of darkness, for a favourite
lair when a chance bullet struck him on the forehead.

A searchlight, unexpectedly unmasked, swept the ground. Fortunately,
Setley had just crept into a shell-crater, and the raised lip
effectually intercepted the dazzling rays. From the corner of his eye
he made out the sinister lines of wire fronting the German trenches,
the criss-cross of barbed entanglements standing out like silver
filigree work in the cold rays of the electric light. He was within a
few feet of his objective.

Voices were talking just over the sand-bagged parapet. He listened.
There were Germans speaking in broken English, asking questions in
menacing tones. Someone was answering--and that someone was Private
Sidney Bartlett.




CHAPTER VI

A PRISONER OF WAR


AN almost similar pilgrimage across No Man's Land had been made by
Private Bartlett, but with a different ending. Before he was aware of
the fact he had blundered into a party of Germans engaged in wiring
the defences, and as he made a vicious jab with his bayonet at the
nearest of the Huns he was felled with a blow of a mallet. Without a
cry he dropped senseless.

In an unconscious condition he was brought in by his captors, and
placed unceremoniously on the fire-step of the hostile trench. At the
first sign of the prisoner's senses returning his guards sent word to
their officers that the Englishman was recovering and could be
interrogated.

"Now you vos tell me der truth," said the German menacingly. "Der
whole truth, mind, or we vos haf you shot. I know plenty about your
trenches, so if you tell der lie den I vos you find out. Now, vot
regiment you vos?"

"The Wheatshires," replied the captive promptly. He knew that the
Huns were fully aware of the composition of the troops engaged
opposite to them.

"Goot!" said the Major. "Dot vos so. Now, der is talk of und mine.
Dot is so?"

"Yes," replied Sidney. "We have sunk a mine gallery."

"In vot direction?" was the next question.

Sidney paused to think. He recalled his father's words. "In business,
Sidney, you can tell a lie." This was a business--one of the grimmest
businesses that fall to the lot of men and nations--scientific
murder, licensed under the name of war.

"Why you no answer?" prompted the Hun.

"Suppose I refuse?" asked the captive. "Men taken prisoner are not
compelled to reply to questions on military matters."

The German laughed gruffly.

"Rules of war for fools are," he chuckled. "We Germans make war, we
no play. You answer vill make now, so."

"All right; if I am compelled to do so," rejoined Sidney. "The mine
runs away to your left--two hundred yards, I should think." In point
of fact, and Private Bartlett was perfectly aware of it, the
explosion chamber was almost immediately beyond that part of the
hostile trench in which he was held prisoner. Although the main force
of the explosion would be directed against the Pumpnickel Redoubt
there was the almost certainty of a swift and terrible death to every
living creature in the German first-line trenches as well.

The Hun officer snapped out some words of command to his men. The
soldiers began to pile up sand-bags across the trench to neutralize,
as they thought, the outlying effects of the impending explosion,
while the locality that Bartlett had purposely and wrongly indicated
was cleared of troops.

"Ach!" continued the Major. "Now you vos tell me dis: at vot hour the
mine goes it off?"

"At six-thirty," replied Sidney promptly. He was entering eagerly
into the "business" by this time. It would result, he had no doubt,
in the extermination of several hundred Germans and his comparatively
insignificant self as well.

"Now, we see," remarked the Prussian officer. "If der truth you haf
said, den all vill well be. We keep you here--in der drench."

Evidently the German had certain misgivings, for, ordering a post to
be driven deeply into the slime and his prisoner to be firmly bound
to it, he scurried off to a remote portion of the reserve trenches.

This much Ralph Setley heard. From other sounds he came to the
conclusion that most, if not all, of the German troops were following
their superior's example.

"Time for me to be getting back," he soliloquized. "There may yet be
an opportunity for our chaps to raid the trench and rescue Bartlett
before the mine is sprung. Wonder how time goes? It seems as if I've
been out for a couple of hours."

He returned in quicker time than he had taken to crawl out to the
barbed wire entanglements. For one thing the Huns were no longer in
the trench, ready to train a machine-gun on any moving object that
they were able to discern in the glare of the star-shells. For
another thing, the artillery duel had increased in violence, the rain
of projectiles from the British guns being unmistakably superior in
velocity to that of the Huns. Perhaps it was a prelude to the
impending advance? If so, the hour fixed for the firing of the mine
was at hand.

"That you, Setley?" came a hoarse whisper almost into his ear.

"Yes," replied Ralph, recognizing Alderhame's voice.

"Thought you had been done in. We've been back some time. I crawled
out to see if I could find you. Come along."

A rifle-bullet whizzed past Setley's head.

Promptly he ducked and crouched in a convenient shell-hole. Somewhere
in No Man's Land a Hun sniper was on the qui vive.

A dozen shots rang out from the British trenches in reply. The flash
of the sniper's rifle had betrayed his position. A squeal, like that
of a stuck pig, showed pretty plainly that the Hun ought to have
stopped a bullet.

The noise was but a ruse on the sniper's part, for as Alderhame and
Setley scrambled over the parapet another shot rang out from the same
spot, the bullet grazing the heel of Ralph's boot and cutting a
slight furrow on his wrist.

It was hard lines on the sniper; for just as he fired his second shot
a German shell, falling short--as defective projectiles are apt to
do--landed fairly on top of his lair. In the flash that followed the
luckless sniper's body was hurled high in the air, and fell with a
sickening thud almost on top of the British parapet.

"What have you been up to?" enquired Sergeant Ferris.

Briefly, Setley told the non-com. of what he had heard.

"Then come along and report to the Colonel," continued the sergeant.
"By smoke, if we get permission to attempt a rescue every man-jack in
the battalion will want to be over the top."

"A very creditable performance," declared the officer commanding the
Wheatshires, when Ralph had made his report. "Private Bartlett is a
brick. No; I do not think it advisable to go out again. The hostile
wire is now intact, I understand. As things go we must leave Bartlett
to take his chances. It would be madness to throw even a platoon
against standing entanglements. One must not allow sentiment to
jeopardize men's lives."

Somewhat crestfallen, Sergeant Ferris and Private Setley left the
C.O.'s dug-out. It was now half-past two--the time fixed for the men
to assemble for the task of occupying and consolidating the
mine-crater.

Like ghostly forms the steel-helmeted Tommies clustered in the
fire-trench. The officers, nervously consulting their watches at
every half-minute, felt the tedious wait as acutely as the men. Once
the whistle blew the excitement of the wild rush would come as a
welcome relief to the dreary and nerve-racking period of waiting,
when men have opportunities to conjure up mental pictures of what
might happen during the dash across No Man's Land.

"Ain't it about time that blinkin' mine went up?" whispered George
Anderson. "Ain't it perishin' cold? If I 'ave to wait much longer I
won't 'ave no feet to carry me over the top."

"Five minutes longer," announced Penfold. "Hullo! What's up with the
company on our right flank?"

The men referred to could be seen filing off along the narrow trench.
In half a minute the three adjacent bays were deserted, except for
the sentries and the men told off for duty in the firing line.

A subaltern floundered along the duck-boards and whispered to the
platoon commander.

The charge was to be deferred pending further orders from
headquarters. Either something had gone wrong with the final
preparations of the mine, or else information had been received that
necessitated the advance being postponed.

"Turn in, you fellows," said Sergeant Ferris. "No more going out
to-night! Sorry for young Bartlett, but you know what the Colonel
said."

"'Ow about our relief, sergeant?" enquired George Anderson. "Thought
the Wheatshires were to be sent back last night?"

"Don't know as you've much cause to grumble," replied the N.C.O.,
"seeing that you haven't been twenty-four hours in the firing trench.
Some of the boys have had six days of it."

"Seems like twenty-four months, sergeant," continued Ginger.

"P'r'aps; but you're a glutton for going out over No Man's Land,"
said Ferris. "You've no call to complain that it hasn't been exciting
enough."

"A chap must do something to keep himself warm," groused the private,
as he followed Setley and Alderhame to their now depleted dug-out.




CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST ADVANCE


"MY eye, you chaps! Come out and have a look," exclaimed Penfold,
who, having gone to draw rations for the rest of the occupants of the
dug-out, had just returned with a generous quantity of tea, bacon,
and comparatively fresh loaves.

"Look at what?" asked Alderhame, still stretched on his bed of damp
straw. "The dawn----?"

"At what those strafed Huns have done," declared Penfold.

"If it's young Sidney they've been doing in there'll be trouble,"
declared Alderhame.

The quartette left their subterranean retreat and made their way to
the fire-trench. By means of a trench periscope they surveyed the
hostile lines. Above the sand-bags was a rough notice-board on which
was chalked:


    "OTHER COMRADS WELKOME."


A fusillade of rifle bullets quickly demolished the offending board,
but almost immediately it was replaced by another:


    "WHEN ARE YOU ENGLANDER COMING? WE
    ARE TIRED OF WATEING FOR THE ADVANCE
    PROMISED."


This, too, was speedily shot to pieces, and having let off a
considerable quantity of "hot air" the Tommies returned to their
breakfasts.

At ten o'clock the men crowded into the fire-trench. Although no
information had been given out concerning the revised arrangements
for the attack the men instinctively realized that the crucial moment
was at hand.

Suddenly the desultory cannonade gave place to a violent artillery
bombardment, to which the German guns could do little or nothing in
reply. Admirably registered, their range being regulated either by
observation officers at isolated posts or else from the aeroplanes
that hovered overhead, the shells battered the Hun wire entanglements
and first-line trenches almost out of recognition. The air was filled
with dust and smoke--red, yellow, and green in colour--while through
the clouds of vapour could be discerned the dismembered bodies of
German soldiers hurled twenty feet or more into the air by the
terrific force of the exploding missiles.

For a solid twenty minutes the hail of high explosive projectiles
continued, while simultaneously shrapnel put up a barrage in the rear
of the hostile trenches with a two-fold purpose: to prevent the Huns
running away and also to make it almost impossible for reinforcements
to be brought up to the firing line.

"They're lifting!" exclaimed Penfold as the shells began to drop
further away.

"Five minutes more, lads!" said the platoon commander in clear,
decisive tones. "Now, show them what the Wheatshires can do in broad
daylight."

"D'ye want a leg-up, Tubby?" sang out George Anderson, addressing his
remarks to a corpulent private whose previous efforts to surmount the
parapet were ludicrous in spite of the mental and physical strain of
"going over the top."

A general laugh greeted George's words, the butt of his remarks
joining in the hilarity. With few exceptions the men were
high-spirited. Their confidence in the artillery and the knowledge
that they were "top-dog" when it came to hand-to-hand fighting made
them eager and alert to rush forward at the first blast of the
whistle.

Thirty seconds more.

With an ear-splitting roar and a veritable volcano of flame the mine
under the Pumpnickel Redoubt was exploded. The earth trembled
violently with the crash of the detonation. In places sand-bags
slipped bodily into the British trench. A gust of violently displaced
air, bearing grit and dust, mingled with weightier fragments, swept
over the heads of the waiting Tommies. Where the strongly fortified
earthworks had stood was a crater quite two hundred yards across, but
how deep the British were yet to learn.

Before the last of the far-flung debris had fallen to earth the
whistles sounded. With a rousing cheer the line of khaki-clad men
swarmed over the parapet into the muddy and smoke-laden,
crater-pitted No Man's Land.

Almost without opposition the Wheatshires gained their objective.
More, carried away by their enthusiasm, pressed onwards, until their
officers, realizing that the men were in danger of being hit by their
own shells, recalled them with difficulty.

Lining the outer edge of the enormous mine-crater, the Wheatshires
set to work to consolidate their easily won position. Setley, while
engaged in the work, viewed with astonishment the stupendous result
of the explosion of the mine. For full seventy feet the scorched and
still smoking earth sloped steeply to the bottom of the immense pit.
Everything of a defensive nature--concrete gun-pits, reinforced
trenches, and deep dug-outs--was obliterated by the comparatively
smooth "batter" of displaced chalk and earth.

"When are the guns going to lift, do you think, sergeant?" asked
Penfold, who, having laid aside his rifle, was piling up sand-bags
with the energy of a steam-engine.

"'Bout time," replied Sergeant Ferris. "We're supposed to make good
for a mile. Hullo! What's happening on our left flank?"

Setley glanced in the direction indicated by the non-com. Here the
Coalshires, many obliquely to the general line of advance, were
falling in heaps. Men were tugging and hacking frantically at
formidable barriers of uncut barbed wire. Evidently this section of
the hostile line had escaped the otherwise general pulverization of
the Hun entanglements, while the enemy, quick to grasp the advantage,
had brought up dozens of machine-guns from deep dug-outs, raising the
intact weapons to the surface by means of lifts.

"Good God!" ejaculated Alderhame hoarsely. "Our fellows are giving
way."

With almost every officer either killed or wounded, confronted by an
almost insurmountable barrier of barbed wire, and subjected to a
terrific hail of machine-gun fire the Coalshires were almost
decimated. Bodies, riddled with bullets, were hanging from the wire,
their clothing held by the tenacious barbs. Contradictory orders
added to the confusion, while to make matters worse the Huns began
firing gas-shells into the wavering troops.

The quick eye of the Wheatshires' Colonel took in the situation.
Another regiment, hitherto held in reserve, was advancing to assist
in the holding of the mine-crater in anticipation of the usual
counter-attack. For the time being the reinforcements must make good
the advantage won by the battalion already in possession of the
position.

At the word of command the Wheatshires swung out of the captured
crater and charged the flank of that part of the German trenches left
intact.

Almost before he realized it Setley found himself in a traverse, the
furthermost end of which was packed with Huns, whose attention was
mainly directed upon the disordered Coalshires on their immediate
front.

With bayonet and bomb the attackers cleared the front three bays of
the trench, the surviving Germans either bolting from their dug-outs
or throwing up their hands with the now familiar cry of "Mercy,
Kamerad."

Briefly the situation was as follows. On a front of nearly four miles
the British had advanced a distance averaging eight hundred yards
with the exception of half a mile of trenches before which the
Coalshires had been held up. This section, strongly defended, was a
tough nut to be cracked, but now surrounded on three sides, the Huns
had either the option to resist to the last man or surrender. For the
present they chose the former alternative, conscious that by holding
out they were deferring the general advance of the British troops.

"Clear those dug-outs!" shouted a captain to No. 3 Platoon.
Experience had taught him the inadvisability of leaving a nest of
armed Huns behind the advancing Tommies.

"Out you come!" shouted Alderhame, flattening himself against the
concrete sides of the first dug-out and pointing his rifle down the
flight of steps leading to the deep subterranean retreat.

With his bayonet at the "ready" Setley took up his stand at the
opposite side and awaited the result of his comrade's challenge,
while George Anderson covered the mouth of the dug-out with a Mills
bomb. "Ja! We come!" shouted a guttural voice from the deep recesses.

"And be mighty sharp about it," rejoined Alderhame.

But instead of the head of a procession of grey-coated Huns with
upheld hands a bomb came hurtling from the dug-out. With the fuse
sizzling briskly the missile dropped midway between Setley and the
ex-actor.

In a trice Alderhame threw himself flat upon the ground. Setley,
hardly realizing the danger, stood stockstill, his bayonet still
directed towards the mouth of the dug-out. In another second----

With a muffled bang the bomb exploded. Ralph had a momentary vision
of a khaki-clad Tommy being lifted five or six feet from the ground
and subsiding almost at his feet. Simultaneously George Anderson
hurled his missile straight into the cavernous recesses of the
dug-out with disastrous results to the former occupants. "'Urt?"
enquired Ginger laconically, as he assisted the fallen Tommy to his
feet. It was Penfold, dazed and shaken, but otherwise unhurt.

Seeing the bomb lying on the ground Penfold, with admirable presence
of mind, snatched up a sand-bag, threw it upon the missile and had
held it in position until the explosion took place. This sand-bag
resisted the disastrous effect of the bomb, although the detonation
was sufficient to blow the intrepid Penfold some feet into the air.

"Good for the D.C.M.," yelled Alderhame. "Come on, lads. Let's see if
any of the swine are still in this rat-hole."

"Give 'em another bomb first," suggested Ginger. "Stand by, 'ere
goes."

The men waited until the reverberations of the explosion had died
away; then looked at each other enquiringly.

"Come on," shouted Alderhame, unfixing his bayonet and placing his
rifle against the concrete face of the dug-out. Then, borrowing a
bomb from the obliging Anderson, he led the way into the underground
refuge, while Setley following, closely at his heels, flashed a torch
over his comrade's shoulder.

The place reeked vilely of sulphurous smoke. It had been lighted by
electricity, but the concussion had shattered the bulbs. The Hun who
had hurled the bomb was lying across the fifth step. A little lower
down two more were huddled lifeless against the walls. Another,
dangerously wounded, raised one hand in a mute appeal for mercy.

"All right, Fritz," said Alderhame. "We won't hurt you any more."

This was apparently the last of the original occupants of the
dug-out. For thirty-five steps the two chums descended cautiously,
while at some distance behind came Penfold, Anderson and another man
being left to guard the entrance in case an over-zealous Tommy took
it into his head to throw down a bomb "just for luck."

"Look out!" cautioned Setley. "There's someone still there."

Muttered guttural words and suspicious scuffling confirmed Ralph's
statement. The ex-actor made ready to pull out the safety pin of this
bomb.

"Surrender!" he shouted, "or I'll blow the crowd of you to Hades."

"Don't," was the reply. "I've got them properly set. I'm an
Englishman--a Wheatshire."

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Alderhame, while Setley gave vent to a whoop of
surprise and satisfaction, for the voice was that of Sidney Bartlett.




CHAPTER VIII

CUT OFF


ENTERING the main room of the spacious dug-out Ralph and his comrades
found the place illuminated by a couple of candles that the Huns,
with characteristic forethought, had lighted in anticipation of the
failure of the electric current.

The place was a combined dormitory and living-room. Against three
walls were tiers of bed-boxes, showing that there was accommodation
for at least fifty men. Tables and chairs, looted from French houses,
occupied most of the floor space. Even though intended for the German
rank and file the dug-out, in the matter of comfort and security, was
far more habitable and commodious than those of the British troops.
It was constructed with a view of lasting, whereas the British
dug-outs were of a temporary nature, pending the long-promised and
eagerly awaited Great Advance. It was one of the numerous concrete
works that the Huns never expected to have to evacuate so long as the
war lasted. To their cost they found that British tenacity and
courage, backed by the powerful shells supplied by the munition
workers at home, were more than a match for German ingenuity and
machine-like methods of waging modern war.

Crowded into one corner of the dug-out were eleven Prussians, for the
most part sullen and brutal in features and with the fear of death in
their bloodshot eyes. Some of them were wounded; all were caked from
head to foot with mud and soot.

Armed with a German rifle and bayonet stood Private Bartlett, as
proud as a peacock.

"Glad you came," he exclaimed. "I knew things were going all right
when these fellows came skeltering for shelter, and still more so
when you flung a bomb down the stairs----"

"We didn't," expostulated Alderhame jocularly. "We wouldn't do you
such a dirty trick, Sidney. Blame your pal, Ginger."

"He's all right, then?" asked the rescued man.

"And so are you," added Ralph. "Good for promotion."

"'Cause why?"

"I heard you being cross-examined by the Prussian officer and your
replies," continued Setley. "Simply had to report to the O.C., you
know. Well, what happened afterwards?"

"They knocked me about a bit," declared Bartlett. "Thought I was
kidding them, I suppose, but as it was the right way as far as they
were concerned they got a bit more civil. Finally, when the
bombardment commenced they pushed me down this dug-out. Crikey! I
thought the roof was tumbling in every second, and fifty feet below
ground at that. Then when the bomb was chucked down the stairs the
Huns here knew the game was up. They nearly fell over themselves
trying to get me to take them prisoners--and there they are."

"Any way out there?" asked Setley, pointing to a door at the remote
end of the underground room.

"Don't know," said Bartlett. "I'll soon see."

He came back with the information that it led only to a smaller room,
evidently set apart for non-commissioned officers.

"Good enough," declared Ralph. "We'll leave the prisoners here until
we can send them to the advance-cages."

"You our lives save?" enquired a Hun corporal anxiously.

"Yes, if you behave yourselves," said Bartlett. "We won't drop a bomb
amongst you as we clear out. That's not the British way, you know."

Collecting the captured rifles and side-arms, the three Wheatshires
returned to the open air, where Ginger greeted his restored pal with
grim Cockney humour.

"Wot, more of 'em dahn there?" he asked. "S'welp me. 'Ere goes."

Like a terrier after a swarm of rats Anderson was about to plunge
down the flight of steps when Bartlett arrested his movements.

"It's no go," he said. "We've promised them quarter."

"After they tried to do the dirty on us," grumbled Ginger, still
fumbling with the safety-pin of a bomb. "I'll give 'em quarter--not
'arf."

Sidney barred his way. Setley and Alderhame joined in an attempt to
check the ferocious ardour of their comrade. How the dispute might
have ended if allowed to continue must remain in doubt, for a heavy
shell, landing in the bay of the captured trench, exploded and threw
the four men to the ground.

Half buried with debris they extricated themselves, none the worse
except for a severe shaking. All thoughts of the dispute were
forgotten.

The Wheatshires were occupying the captured section of the trench,
the men toiling strenuously to convert the parados into a parapet. A
hundred yards to the right the Huns still held their own. A traverse,
heavily defended with machine-guns, had proved too great an obstacle
to be rushed in a frontal attack. To the rear of the Wheatshires'
position was the barbed wire entanglement that had held up the
luckless Coalshires; in front the Germans were massing for a gigantic
counter-attack, while on the right of the British battalion the
Blankshires had been compelled to give ground. Added to this the
German guns had got the exact range of the captured section of
trenches, while inexplicably the British artillery were putting up a
barrage in front of a position where the Huns had made no serious
effort to counter-attack.

This error was the result of one of those elements of chance that
often win or lose battles. The telephone wires from the observer's
post to the battery had been severed, and already three devoted
linesmen had lost their lives in heroic efforts to repair the means
of communication. A signaller mounted the parapet and attempted to
convey the much-needed information to the gunners, but he fell almost
immediately, pierced by a dozen machine-gun bullets.

However well the advance was faring elsewhere the grim fact was
patent that the Wheatshires were cut off.

The men knew it. They were literally fighting with their backs to the
wall--and it is said that a Briton never fights better than in such a
position.

"Stick it, men!" shouted the colonel.

The Wheatshires responded with a cheer.

"Reminds a fellow of the winning goal at Yatton Park," remarked
Alderhame, as he shoved a fresh clip of cartridges into the magazine
of his rifle. "It's getting a bit of a hot corner."

"Garn! It don't beat my old woman on Saturday night," retorted Ginger
contemptuously.

The hurricane of hostile shells continued without intermission for
the space of nearly ten minutes. The hastily constructed parapet of
sand-bags disappeared in clouds of dust and noxious smoke. The men,
gasping for breath, clung tenaciously to the side of the trench,
except on the left flank where British and German bombers were
hurling their missiles with deadly ferocity. Not only in the captured
section of the trench, but along the outer lip of the huge
mine-crater, the Wheatshires and their supporting battalion doggedly
held their ground, despite the pounding of huge shells that several
times blew half a dozen men into a state of unrecognizability.

"What the deuce are our guns doing?" was the oft-repeated question,
for, although the gigantic messengers of death were still hurtling
through the air, the shells were not directed upon the dense columns
of German infantry who were slowly following up the barrage set up by
their guns.

Then the crash of the exploding shells from the Hun batteries ceased.
Only the distant roar of the artillery duel and the sharp bark of the
bombs broke the silence. Compared with the titanic thunder of the
bombardment the residue of sound was hardly noticeable. It was the
signal for the Wheatshires to pull themselves together to withstand
the counter-attack.

In dense serried masses the columns of Bavarian infantry advanced.
They came on without hesitation, yet in comparative silence,
confident that their guns had so pulverized the trenches their
Prussian comrades had lost that the charge would be little more than
a "walk-over."

"Five hundred yards! Fire!"

From Maxims and Lewis guns, hastily mounted on the battered parapets,
from scores, nay, hundreds, of rifles the hail of nickel from the
Wheatshires smote the ranks of their opponents. Like a giant
receiving a knock-out blow betwixt the eyes, the field-grey masses
recoiled, wavered and broke, in spite of the efforts of their
officers to check the rout as the men rushed past them.

Ironical cheers greeted the discomfiture of the Bavarians, then the
Wheatshires settled down to undergo the renewal of their punishment,
for certain it was that the German gunners, exasperated at the check
of the infantry, would renew the bombardment with increased violence.

What seemed worse was the fact that several regiments of the enemy
had succeeded in working round both flanks. On the left the Huns,
still in possession of part of the same trench as the Wheatshires
held, were strongly reinforced. The British infantry were now in a
dangerous salient, but still they had not given an inch of ground.
Nor could reserves be rushed up to strengthen the advanced position,
for the comparatively level stretch of ground was completely exposed
to machine-gun fire, to say nothing of the formidable barbed wire
that the British guns had failed to demolish earlier in the day.

An aeroplane droned overhead at an altitude of less than a thousand
feet. By the red, white, and blue concentrated rings on the planes it
was recognized as a British machine. In spite of a warm greeting from
the anti-aircraft guns, for mushrooms of white smoke was bursting all
around it, the biplane circled serenely. Its object was soon
apparent, for, like a whirlwind, shells from the British guns
commenced to put up a barrage behind the Huns holding the section of
trenches on the Wheatshires' left flank.

Simultaneously four indistinct shapes, resembling gigantic tortoises,
appeared in view, ambling leisurely towards the uncut wire.

"That's the sort!" commented Ginger Anderson. He could now reasonably
risk drinking the remainder of the contents of his water-bottle.
"'Ere come the bloomin' Tanks."




CHAPTER IX

THE ADVANCE OF THE TANKS


SLOWLY the mechanical mastodons advanced, reeling from side to side
as they skirted the edges of the largest shell-craters. Through their
multi-coloured sides guns, as yet ominously silent, grinned
menacingly. The weapons, moving easily on their mountings, began to
search for their objectives.

Through the waist-deep slime the Tanks floundered, displacing tons of
mud under the resistless pressure of the broad-flanged endless belts.
A shell from a distant German gun burst close alongside one of the
steel mammoths, converting the "invisible" colour-scheme into a
hideous daub of greenish yellow, but beyond that the H.E. missiles
had no effect upon the mobile fortress. Straight from the triple row
of barbed wire the Tanks waddled deliberately and remorselessly. The
Huns watched their approach with evident concern, so much so that the
bombers engaged in a duel with the Wheatshires across the traverse
abandoned the task and scurried to their dug-outs. A few, more
courageous than their comrades, directed their energies towards
hurling their missiles against their uncanny foes. It was like
shooting peas at a crocodile.

As matchwood the stout stakes supporting the entanglements snapped
under the impact of the leading Tank's snout. Wire, coiling like
writhing snakes directly the tension was released, was swept aside as
easily as if made of pack thread. Then, lifting its bluff bows, the
Tank ambled awkwardly up the parapet of the hostile lines, displacing
sand-bags by the score, and finally coming to a standstill, like a
steel Bridge of Sighs, across a canal of liquid mud with grey-coated
Huns in place of gondolas.

"She's bogged!" yelled Penfold.

"No fear," retorted Alderhame. "She's just having a little rest. See,
her wheels aren't moving."

The Tank was making good use of the stop, whether forced or
otherwise, for astride of the trench she opened a terrific fire,
enfilading the Germans as they crowded, panic-stricken, in the
limited space 'twixt parapet and parados.

Up went scores of hands, but in vain. Mingled with those of the Huns
who wished to surrender were several "die-hards," who with bullet and
bomb tried in vain to find a vulnerable spot in the armour of their
titanic antagonist. A few even scaled the side of the Tank and rained
savage but ineffectual blows upon it with the butts of their rifles.

The second and third Tanks were now grinding their way through the
hostile parapet. One, bridging the trench, landed immediately over
the entrance to a dug-out. The reinforced concrete, set upon a mud
foundation, was unable to resist the strain of hundreds of tons
deadweight. The fore part of the landship sank until its vertical
axis was inclined at an angle of forty-five degrees.

"She'll never get out of that," thought Setley, for the mere
possibility of that mass of metal extricating itself from the chaos
of mud and shattered concrete seemed out of the question. For perhaps
five minutes the Tank remained in this ignominious position, the
while spitting out flame from the muzzle of her guns, her tractor
bands revolving uselessly since they found no resistance in the soft
earth.

The wheels ceased to revolve. To outward appearance the Tank was out
of action. Her guns no longer fired, since the Germans had evacuated
the trench and were either risking certain death by bolting across
the open or else obtaining a doubtful shelter in their dug-outs.

Then the traction bands were restarted, this time in a reverse
direction. Slowly the huge mass of metal, disengaging itself from the
debris, backed through the passage it had previously cleared in the
parapet, and descended the glacis. Choosing another spot, the Tank
again crawled forward, this time bridging the trench and disappearing
beyond the parados.

All save the first mastodon had now passed the fire-trench. The one
that remained did so with a set purpose. While it bridged the trench
it was certain death for a Hun to show himself. A few, armed with
bombs, did issue from their dug-outs, but caught by a hail of bullets
from a machine-gun they ceased to be effective units of the Kaiser's
legions.

The colonel of the Wheatshires saw the chance of straightening the
line. He knew his men had suffered severely, but the time to rest was
not yet. Armed only with a stick the gallant, grey-haired C.O. sprang
upon the shell-scarred parados.

"The Wheatshires will advance," he shouted. "Come on, men; we've
stuck in this trench quite long enough."

A hoarse shout rose from the parched throats of the indomitable
Tommies as the remainder of the battalion leapt out of the trench
they had held so stubbornly. In thirty seconds their former shelter
was untenanted save for the dead and wounded and a handful of men
told off to guard the entrance to the dug-outs that contained
prisoners.

"Hang on to the tail of that Tank," shouted Sergeant Ferris to the
men of his section. "We'll have our work cut out to settle the Huns
who aren't squashed. Don't leave a single Fritz with a rifle in his
hand behind you--I've had some."

The sergeant looked a most ferocious object despite his inches, for
he was just five feet one and a half. His steel helmet was dented and
bespattered with mud. His face was black with dirt thrown up by a
shell that exploded less than twenty yards from him. His great coat
was torn away at the waist, while one puttee was ripped away
entirely. His left wrist was clumsily swathed in first-aid dressings
that momentarily threatened to fall off, while to complete the
picture a partly dressed goose dangled from his belt.

Ferris had always the resources of an old campaigner. In one of the
captured dug-outs he had found the bird, and with the idea that it
would "come in handy after the dust-up" he had lashed the goose's
legs round his belt.

"Don't think I'm greedy, boys," he shouted. "You'll all stand in
later on."

The Germans in the second and third line trenches were fairly
trapped. Their own guns were putting up a barrage behind them. Mere
"cannon fodder" the defeated infantry received no consideration from
their own artillery. The latter, their one idea being to attempt to
hold the British attack, were furiously pouring in shells that no
troops could hope to pass through in the open.

There was a stubborn resistance offered by the Huns in the second
line of trenches, but the Tanks, assisted by the now wildly excited
Wheatshires, were not to be denied. With bayonet and bomb the Tommies
rushed the defences and made prisoners of the surviving Huns.

There was still plenty of work to be done before the attack was
resumed upon the third and last of that section of earthwork. The
captured trench had to be consolidated as a matter of precaution, in
case the final attack failed.

"Who's got a fag?" enquired Penfold, stopping in the act of
transferring a sand-bag from the parapet to the parados. "Hang it
all, did you ever see such mud? It's a jolly sight worse than our
trenches."

"Here you are," said Ralph, tendering a very soiled cigarette. "Let
me give you a hand."

Penfold lighted the cigarette, then, shouldering the heavy sack,
descended very cautiously from the fire-step to the floor of the
trench. His feet sank into the slime until the mud and water reached
to his knees. Vainly he tried to extricate himself. It was not until
Setley and Alderhame threw down a couple of pieces of timber as
footholds and tugged at their comrade by main force that Penfold was
free from the tenacious mud.

It was an even more difficult matter to heave the sand-bag into
position. Again Penfold's legs sank ankle deep. Perspiring freely in
spite of the cold he struggled to maintain his balance without
dropping the sand-bag from his shoulder. In his efforts his steel
helmet slipped over his eyes. Still holding on with one hand to his
burden he grasped the rim of his "tin hat." As he did so a bullet
pinged sharply against the metal head-covering, the glancing blow
causing Penfold to stagger and drop the sand-bag. Blood was streaming
down his face.

"I always said that steel helmets were a rotten swindle," he
exclaimed, then he broke off abruptly and looked dully at his right
hand. The middle finger had been completely severed by the bullet.

"Thought it was my head!" he said. "Hanged if I felt this at all."

"You are a lucky bounder, Penfold," declared George Anderson. "It'll
get you back to Blighty for a dead cert."

"Thanks, you're welcome to my luck," replied the wounded man as he
submitted to the surgical attentions of Setley and Alderhame. "I call
it jolly hard lines, just as we are going forward. Now, if this had
happened while we were held up in our trenches I wouldn't have
minded. Jolly rough luck, I call it."

Just then Sergeant Ferris came bustling along the captured trench.

"Hullo! Copped it?" he enquired laconically.

"Rather," replied Penfold dolefully. "Suppose there's no chance of my
having a slice of that goose now?"

"Where is the bird, sergeant?" enquired Alderhame.

Dumfounded the non-com. clapped his hands on his belt. The goose had
vanished--all but the legs, that were still fastened to the
sergeant's equipment.

"Must 'a' lost it in the charge," decided Ferris. "I'm off back to
look for it."

Regardless of the risk he ran the N.C.O. doubled across the
shell-pitted ground. In five minutes he was back again, holding what
appeared to be a flattened lump of mud.

"Got it!" he exclaimed triumphantly. "Found it in the track of a
Tank. Only the head was to be seen, but I managed to hike it clear of
the mud."

"Not much of a goose now, sergeant," remarked Ginger.

"True, lad, true; but it'll wash all right while it's boiling. One
can't afford to be too particular these times."




CHAPTER X

THE WRECKED LANDSHIP


ONCE again the weary yet undaunted Wheatshires braced themselves for
another rush. The period of respite over, they had to make an advance
upon the third line of German trenches.

Already three of the Tanks, which had been temporarily sheltering in
a large mine-crater, were labouring across the open stretch of ground
separating the second and third lines. The guns, never silent since
the early morning, were now giving vent to a veritable crescendo of
hate.

Almost in the centre of the Wheatshires' objective a large brick
building stood out clearly against the sky. It was apparently the
only one that had escaped the searching attention of the British
guns, and with the exception of the roof, the rafters of which were
innocent of tiles, was practically intact. It was a two-storied
building. The windows on the ground floor were strongly barricaded,
while sand-bags had been piled up in front, forming an effective
defence against all but the heavier guns.

While the eager infantry were being held in leash the Tanks sauntered
onwards, two making for the wire entanglements, which already were
badly cut about, while the third floundered straight for the
building, although there were no signs that the place was being held
by the enemy.

When about twenty yards from the house the Tank seemed to hesitate.
It evidently was pondering whether to go straight through the
obstruction or waddle past it, until half a dozen machine-guns, that
had hitherto been silent, rattled a hail of bullets upon the
monster's steel hide.

The Huns had withheld their fire, hoping to catch the British
infantry in the open; but the menace of the Tank was too great for
their nerves. Without gaining the slightest military advantage they
opened out with their machine-guns, and thereby betrayed their
presence.

With a rending crash the Tank charged the obstruction. Sand-bags flew
right and left, like mud splashed from the wheel of a motor-car;
bricks and rafters clattered pellmell as the mass of metal literally
ate into the building.

The next instant a mine exploded almost under the Tank. Tons of earth
were hurled into the air, mingled with sand-bags and blocks of
concrete. When the clouds of dust and smoke had drifted away the Tank
was lying on its side, with the upturned tractor bands still
revolving like a derelict escalator.

With a loud yell, about fifty of the Wheatshires rushed forward to
avenge the trapped mammoth. As they charged across the open bombs and
machine-guns took heavy toll. To Setley it seemed like rushing
through a hailstorm, with lead, nickel, and fragments of iron in
place of frozen rain. Yet, carried away with the heat of combat, he
was hardly conscious of the danger until a bursting shell lifted him
off his feet and hurled him violently against a heap of displaced
sand-bags.

For some seconds he lay still, hardly able to realize his
surroundings. Then cautiously he raised his head and took stock of
his position.

He was not alone. Lying on the ground close to him were a dozen or
more of his comrades either dead or seriously wounded. Three or four
others, seemingly unhurt, hugged the mud, in order to escape the
tornado of machine-gun fire from the two intact windows of the
barricaded building. Amongst these were Alderhame and Anderson. Of
the rest of the platoon none was visible, and since the position
still remained in the hands of the Huns it was evident that the rush
had been swept away by hostile fire.

"What's to be done?" enquired Ralph.

"Dunno," replied Ginger. "You're senior man now, I guess, of what's
left of us. Keep down, or they'll lob a bomb into the crowd of us."

"Crowd," thought Setley grimly. Five all told, capable of bearing
arms. And he was in charge of the squad. The sense of his new
responsibility stiffened his fibre.

"It's no use going back," he soliloquized. "Nor does it seem at all
desirable to stick here, Let me see how the land lies."

Cautiously separating two sand-bags, Setley peered through the
two-inch gap thus formed between them. Ten yards away and slightly to
the right front were the German machine-gunners, their whole
attention centred on the trench that had so lately been theirs.
Between the wisps of smoke that drifted slowly from the still reeking
crater Ralph saw that the Huns had only two machine-guns left intact,
and of these only the muzzle and a few inches of the water-jacket
were visible. The rest of the weapons were hidden by sand-bags.

"Can you throw a bomb fairly into that emplacement?" asked Ralph,
addressing the redoubtable Ginger, who, despite a severe shaking,
still retained half a dozen Mills bombs.

"You bet," replied Ginger. "Two afore they knows they're on the way
to Kingdom Come."

"All right," continued Setley. "Alderhame, McTurk and I will follow
up with the bayonet. We must wipe both crews out. Ready?"

Crouching ready to spring and hurl his deadly missiles the bomber
removed the safety-pin. To Setley it seemed an interminable time
before he threw one bomb. Four seconds? It seemed like forty before
the missile burst with a loud report right in the centre of the
over-attentive Huns.

Up sprang the four men, Ginger with another bomb and the rest with
rifle and bayonet. Over the sand-bags they leapt, landing upon the
bodies of the bombed gunners, scrambled over the intervening debris
and made for the second machine-gun.

"Take that, you dirty skunks!" shouted Anderson, launching another
bomb. The missile, missing its mark, exploded harmlessly beyond the
sand-bag emplacement.

The Germans faced about, and with levelled revolvers defended
themselves against the unexpected assailants.

With a rifle-shot Setley brought down one of the men--a big bloated
sergeant--and plunged his bayonet into the second. As he did so, he
was just conscious of a tingling sensation in his left shoulder. A
revolver bullet, fired at practically point-blank range, had seared
his flesh. McTurk accounted for the man who had fired that shot and
then went down with a ghastly wound in his throat.

As he fell the dying Tommy grasped Setley by the ankles, bringing the
lad prostrate upon the ground. Before he could regain his feet Ralph
found himself at grips with a tall, slim, bearded Fritz, who in his
frenzy attempted to batter in his antagonist's head with the butt of
his revolver, notwithstanding that the weapon was still loaded in
four chambers.

Guarding his head with his left hand, Setley recovered himself
sufficiently to plant a powerful blow with his fist upon the point of
the Hun's chin. The man recoiled, dropped his revolver, and raised
his hands above his head. As he did so a fragment of shrapnel caught
him and stretched him lifeless upon the floor.

Recovering his rifle and bayonet Ralph regained his feet, eager to
throw himself again into the fray. But the struggle, as far as the
machine-guns' crews were concerned, was over. Ginger Anderson,
smothered in mud, was greedily quaffing the contents of a Hun's
water-bottle, while Alderhame, leaning against the wall, was
methodically wiping the point of his bayonet. Five Germans and the
luckless McTurk lay across the captured weapon, while the sixth Hun,
attempting to escape, had been shot down by Alderhame as he scrambled
out of one of the windows facing the enemy lines.

"We've been an' gone and done it this time," declared Ginger, wiping
his mouth with the back of his hand. "An' our chaps 'ave started
shelling the place. Only shrapnel up to now; but if they starts
throwin' in high explosives up we go in a sort of fiery chariot that
ain't at all to my likin'."

"Can't we signal and let them know?" asked Alderhame.

The rattle of shrapnel fragments against the tottering walls gave him
his answer. To attempt to show oneself for the purpose of semaphoring
meant certain death.

"Look here; we'll make for the crater where the Tank is lying," said
Setley. "We'll have to take our chances of getting strafed by the
Huns. I'll lead the way!"

"One moment," exclaimed Alderhame, and still leaning against the
brickwork he raised his rifle and fired. Before the echoes of the
report had died away a heavy body crashed from the gaunt rafters
overhead--that of a German observation officer.

"My bird," drawled the ex-actor. "I spotted him about to descend.
See, he had his revolver ready. Thought he'd caught us napping. Now,
I'm ready."

With their rifles slung across their backs the three Tommies
cautiously crawled round the pile of sand-bags and gained the open
air. A fragment of shrapnel glanced off Setley's steel helmet,
another nicked a piece out of the heel of Alderhame's boot, but
without further incident the trio dropped into the crater in which
the Tank lay on its side.

The traction band was now motionless. There were no signs that life
existed within that massive steel shell. The tail-wheels, which had
been raised as the Tank approached the objective that she had failed
to surmount, were buckled by the impact of a fragment of flying
metal. The futurist colour-designs on her exposed side were scorched
and blistered, while the armour-plate was pitted with honourable
scars. At an angle of roughly sixty degrees one of her guns projected
aimlessly.

"Which is the way in?" enquired Alderhame. "Suppose this is the
entrance to the foyer and palm-court?"

He battered the metal door in the after end of the sponson with the
butt end of his rifle. It was a risky thing to do, since the crew, if
still alive, might think that the Huns were attempting to force their
way in.

"Hear anything?" asked Setley.

"Excursions and alarums without," quoth the ex-actor. "Within the
silence of the tomb. By Jove! What a reek of petrol!"

A howitzer shell exploding a couple of hundred yards from the crater
in which the Tank lay warned the three Wheatshires that the Huns were
still fumbling for their objective. With the crash of the detonation
the whole fabric of the Tank trembled in spite of its massive bulk
and weight.

"She's almost balanced," declared Ralph. "I believe a little power
properly applied would set her on her feet again. Let's try."

The three Tommies, using the trunk of a stout sapling as a lever,
sought to force the landship into its normal position, but in vain.
Their united efforts fell just short of the required power necessary
to overcome the difference in trim.

"See any signs of our boys?" enquired Setley.

George crawled up the incline until he could peer over the lip of the
crater. The Wheatshires still held the captured trench, but further
progress had been "held up" by hostile rifle and machine-gun fire.
Overhead the shells from the distant British howitzers screamed
incessantly as they pounded the position to which the Huns had fallen
back.

A metallic clank made Setley turn his head The door of the Tank
opened cautiously and the bronzed features of one of the crew
appeared in view. There was a dazed look on the man's face, while his
forehead was streaked with caked blood.

"Cheer-o, mate!" sung out the irrepressible Anderson. "Apple-cart
upset? We've come to lend a 'and!"

The man began to cough, and scrambling through the narrow doorway
collapsed, pointing towards the interior of the stranded monster
before losing consciousness.

Resting their rifles against the side of the Tank, Setley and his
companions squeezed through the door. Sliding over the obliquely
inclined floor, Ralph found himself brought up by the angle formed by
it and the curved wall. His steel helmet saved his head from a nasty
blow, for the whole space seemed filled with machinery.

"It ain't 'arf dark," commented Ginger, "barging into" the
breech-block of a quickfirer. "'Ow about a light? I've got a box of
lucifers on me somewhere."

"Do you think you're chief stoker of a crematorium?" asked Alderhame.
"The place reeks of petrol, man. A spark and there'll be a terrific
explosion."

"Lucky you spoke, mate," rejoined Anderson. "Matches seem to get our
family into trouble. My brother, down Enfield way, got a month for
'aving a match on 'im when he went to the munition factory. Blimey,
wot's this?"

He stooped; his hands came in contact with a human body, one of five
lying tightly packed in one corner of the confined space.

"Don't think they've snuffed it," he continued. "Wot's to be done
with 'em, sergeant?"

Ralph, not altogether pleased at having brevet by his comrade,
pondered over the situation. If the crew were not dead they would
stand a better chance of recovering consciousness in the open air. On
the other hand, they would then be exposed to shell-fire, and it was
evident that the Germans were getting closer to their objective.

"We'll get them out," he decided. "They'll be fairly sheltered under
the lee of the Tank. It's a risk, but that cannot be helped."

With considerable difficulty the three Wheatshires contrived to lift,
carry, and drag the unconscious men from the interior of the
landship, the task of getting them through the narrow doorway being
magnified by the fact that the floor tilted to an enormous degree.

"Nip up and see what's doing," suggested Setley.

On all fours Anderson scaled the side of the crater. In a very short
space of time he was back again with his eyes filled with dust thrown
up by a howitzer-shell that exploded eighty yards away.

"There's another bloomin' Tank a-comin' this way," he announced.

Greeted by a direct but ineffectual fire from machine-guns and
small-arms the oncoming Tank made straight for the mine-crater in
which her consort had been trapped. Right upon the very lip of the
cavity she stopped. Although her crew were not visible it was soon
apparent that they were able to see what was going on, for a voice
hailed:

"We'll try and tow you out. Can you take a wire rope?"

"They think we're the Tankers," said Alderhame. "Look here, I'll risk
it."

Scrambling up the sloping side of the pit Alderhame, reckless of the
shrapnel and rifle bullets, crawled to the rescuing Tank. As he did
so two of the crew leapt down, carrying the end of a length of
flexible steel wire fitted with a shackle.

"Carry on with t'other end, mate," said one, as he proceeded to fix
the shackled end to a massive eyebolt on the underside of the blunt
bows. "Think she'll move?"

"You'll hike her up if you pull in that direction," replied the
ex-actor, indicating the place with his hand. "She's almost ready to
tilt back on her traction-bands."

Without a scratch, although a bullet nicked his shoulder-strap and
some fragments of shrapnel glinted off his helmet, Alderhame regained
the temporary shelter of the crater, carrying with him the end of the
wire rope.

This Setley and Alderhame succeeded in making fast to the overhead
girders, although while engaged upon the task Ralph's cheek was cut
open by the splay of a bullet that hit the metal-work within nine
inches of his head.

"A bit warm up there," commented Ralph, as the two slid to the
shelter of the hole.

With a wave of his arm Setley indicated that all was in readiness.
Slowly the serviceable Tank went astern. The wire rope tautened, and
with hardly any appreciable effort the disabled landship flopped over
into her normal position.

"Where's your commanding officer?" shouted the lieutenant in charge
of the towing Tank. "Who's the senior man?"

"The officer is unconscious, sir," replied Ralph.

"All right. Shift the hawser aft. Motors intact?"

"I cannot say, sir," answered Setley.

"Then you jolly well ought to," grumbled the lieutenant, who was
still under the impression that the three Wheatshires were part of
the Tank's crew. "If you can't start 'em up, slip out both clutches.
Hurry up we can't stop here to be strafed all day."

Working desperately the three men shifted the wire rope to the
required position, placed the crew of the Tank inside, and scrambled
in to the interior of the immobile landship.

Setley had a good knowledge of motor-cars and motor-bikes, but the
complicated machinery of the Tank was beyond him. Since he was not
certain of the way to throw out the clutches, he did the next best
thing: he opened the compression taps in the cylinders, so that the
pistons were free to move up and down without having to push against
a buffer of compressed air.

He was rather sceptical concerning the ability of the towing Tank to
drag the crippled consort up the sloping side of the crater, but, to
his delight, he found that he was mistaken. Choosing the easiest
gradient, the Tank succeeded--not without considerable difficulty--in
hauling her disabled sister out of the hole. The appearance of the
latter was greeted by a round of cheering from the British infantry
and a redoubled dose of "hate" from the infuriated Huns. Not until
they were a mile behind their own lines, and sheltered from direct
fire by a depression in the ground, did the two Tanks come to a
standstill.

"Why, you are Wheatshires!" exclaimed the lieutenant, as Setley and
his comrades emerged from the armoured box. "What are you doing
here?"

"We got cut off, sir," replied Ralph, saluting. "We saw the Tank in
the mine-crater, and we thought we could find cover there."

"And you gave valuable assistance," rejoined the Tank officer,
pulling out a notebook. "Give me your names and regimental numbers.
It will be a pleasure to me to submit a report upon your gallant
conduct in the work of rescue. No, I don't think you'd better try to
rejoin your regiment at present. It isn't healthy out in the open.
Better wait till after dark."

"By Jove, Alderhame," exclaimed Ralph, after the officer had gone,
"if ever I get a chance to serve in a Tank, I'm on!"

"And this bird, too," added Alderhame. "No more foot-slogging
infantry for me if there's a chance of riding in an armoured moving
fort. Wonder how we could work it?"




CHAPTER XI

AN INTERVIEW WITH THE C.O.


IT was close on midnight when Setley and his two companions rejoined
their battalion. Although the distance was not far every foot of the
way was beset with perils, for in spite of the heavier fire from the
British guns the Germans were systematically searching the ground
that had been wrested from them during the day. Every shell hole was
now a miniature lake, covered with a thin coating of ice. A slip on
the steeply sloping edge and the incautious wight would find himself
out of his depth in icy cold water.

The trio met a continuous procession of wounded, most of them having
to be carried by their comrades or else on stretchers or sleighs;
prisoners, too, who had been humanely kept under cover until darkness
fell lest they should be shot down by their own guns, were being
herded across the open--gaunt and hungry men who seemed glad to be
out of the fighting.

Ration and supply parties, units of ammunition columns passed to and
fro, for the firing line had to be fed and provided with bombs and
cartridges. Except for the absence of lights the traffic reminded
Ralph of the Great North Road on the night of Barnet Fair, with the
difference that the predominant colour-scheme was khaki everywhere.

"Hullo, you chaps!" called out a private of the same section,
recognizing the three returning Tommies. "Thought you'd been done in.
You're marked down as missing. Grub? I've a pannikin on the charcoal
fire, and there are some rashers. You've been into the lines of
communication? Heard anything of our being relieved?"

"Not a word," rejoined Ralph, taking possession of a thin cup in
which the tea leaves from the last drinker were still in evidence.
Setley had forgotten to be particular in such matters. "Where's
Sergeant Ferris?"

"Blown to bits," said the other nonchalantly. "We didn't get our
promised share of goose," he added regretfully. "Suppose we are lucky
to get bacon."

The Wheatshires had suffered heavily in the charge. Most of the
officers had either been killed or wounded, while forty per cent of
the rank and file were out of action. Although they had succeeded in
occupying two of the three trenches their failure to reach their
objective was galling to the men. Elsewhere the general plan of
operations had been successful, and now the battle-worn Wheatshires
were consoled with the knowledge that the Huns on their immediate
front were in a position that formed a dangerous salient. Either they
would have to give back or risk almost certain chance of being
surrounded and compelled to surrender.

Dog-tired and bitterly cold, Setley followed the example of his chums
and threw himself down on the fire-step to sleep. Shelter in dug-out
there was none, for so heavy had been the British bombardment that
the remaining shelters were in such a dangerous state that the men
were cautioned not to make use of them.

The constant passing of laden men along the narrow trench, the
ceaseless roar of heavy guns, and the intermittent rattle of
machine-gun fire failed to keep Ralph awake, yet it seemed as if he
had been asleep but a few minutes when he was aroused by a hand
shaking him roughly by the shoulder.

"Turn out, mate," exclaimed Ginger. "We're being relieved. The
bloomin' Downshires are movin' into the trenches."

Setley bestirred himself. Fully equipped he rolled off the fire-step
into a foot of mud and slush that formed the floor of the trench. If
the Huns had had boards they had vanished--probably smashed to atoms
or else covered with debris from the sides of the trench with the
violent concussion of the bombardment.

"Wake that man up!" ordered an officer, indicating a dim form. The
man was dead, shot in his sleep. Ralph remembered that the unlucky
fellow had asked him to move along and give him room. Had Setley not
done so the probability was that he would be lying cold and
motionless.

Silently the depleted battalion moved along the narrow trench, and
with equal caution the goat-skin-clad Downshires filed into the
vacated position. It was now snowing heavily, but the Wheatshires
paid scant heed to the climatic conditions. They were like schoolboys
off for a holiday.

"Hurrah for a good hot bath!" exclaimed Ralph when the men arrived at
the rest-billets. In the trenches he had endured cold, dirt, and all
the horrors of a confined deep ditch of wet clay with a sort of
fatalism; but now the innate desire for cleanliness reasserted
itself.

One of four hundred men, all in a state of _puris naturalibus_,
Setley was ordered to double along a narrow plank gangway. Under one
arm he carried his uniform. Under the other two bundles, one
containing his personal effects, the other his underclothing.

At the end of the gangway were three separate sheds, with a sort of
counter across the open doors. As each man passed the first he threw
in his uniform, receiving in exchange a metal disc. At the second he
parted company with his personal effects, again taking up a metal
token. The third but received his underclothing.

Thence the Tommies entered a large building in which were rows of
tubs filled with hot water. Laughing, shouting, and cracking jokes
the men revelled in the rare luxury, until the stern admonition of
the non-com. to "get a move on" reminded them that there is an end to
all good things, not omitting bathing parades.

Again the procession was re-formed, and at the double the men hurried
along another corridor, passing the other end of the buildings in
which their belongings had been deposited.

Each soldier received a change of underclothing at the first hut, his
personal gear at the second, and his uniform, steam-cleaned and
liberally coated with insect powder at the third. With the regularity
of clockwork the battalion was thus furbished up for its stay at the
rest-billet--a striking testimony to the efficient organization and
to the care and attention given to the troops after their arduous
work in the firing line.

"Private Setley!"

The gruff voice of the platoon sergeant brought Ralph to a halt.

"You're wanted at the orderly-room at three p.m.," continued the
sergeant. "An' don't you forget it."

"Say, sergeant----"

"Well?"

"Do you know what I'm wanted for?"

"Dunno, me lad; you'll find out when you are told an not a minute
before."

Ralph received the message with certain misgivings. The word
"orderly-room" had an unpleasant significance. Vainly he racked his
brains to try to remember if he had done anything for which he might
be "crimed." Then, perhaps, it might be that he was to be detailed
for clerical work. Perish the suggestion! He had had enough of that
at the bank. He hadn't come out to the Front to follow the irksome
routine of doing orderly-room correspondence.

At the hour Ralph reported himself and was brought before the colonel
of the Wheatshires.

The C.O. lost no time in coming to the point,

"I've had a report concerning you," he began. "I understand that you
were in charge of a small squad, that you rushed a machine-gun
emplacement, and that you rendered material assistance under heavy
fire to a disabled Tank. The officer making the report states that
you behaved with admirable bravery, intelligence, and discretion
under highly dangerous circumstances."

The colonel placed the paper on his desk and searched amongst a pile
of documents for another. Setley, in the meanwhile, stood rigidly at
attention, inwardly ill at ease. He had merely done his duty. The
subsequent eulogy from his C.O., although highly gratifying, quite
bewildered him.

"Let me see," continued the colonel, glancing over Ralph's "history
sheet." "You've served a hundred and fifty-six days with the Colours.
You have never been crimed. Your occupation, previous to enlisting,
was banking?"

"Yes, sir," replied Ralph.

"Where were you educated?"

Setley told him, mentioning the name of a well-known West-country
school. The C.O. nodded approval.

"Wonder why he wants to know that?" thought the lad.

He was not long left in doubt.

"You have been recommended for a commission, Private Setley," resumed
the C.O. "I have much pleasure in stating my opinion that you are in
every respect fitted to take up commissioned rank. Being recommended,
of course, does not necessarily mean that you will get it, but in all
probability you will. ...I wish you the best of luck."

"Thank you, sir," replied Ralph.

The colonel made an annotation on the margin of the report.

"In the event of your obtaining this commission," he went on, "have
you any particular choice of a regiment? The decision is entirely in
the hands of the Army Council, you understand, but as far as
practicable the wishes of the individual concerned is taken into
consideration."

"Must it be a Line regiment, sir?"

"Unless you have special qualifications for any other branch of the
Service."

"I would like to try for the Tank Section, sir."

The colonel raised his bushy eyebrows.

"Dash it all!" he ejaculated. "You aim high, young man. However,
since you gained distinction in the Tank affair, perhaps your wishes
will be gratified. Meanwhile, if you take my advice you'll keep this
matter strictly to yourself as far as your comrades are concerned."

The colonel nodded dismissal. Ralph saluted and left the presence of
the commanding officer.

He felt as if he were treading on air. He could hardly realize his
good fortune. It seemed like a dream that would be rudely dispelled
with the dawn. He wanted to pinch himself to be certain that he was
really awake.

On his way back to his billet he encountered Private Anderson looking
smarter than he had ever been known before. Ginger's boots shone
brightly, despite the "dubbin" under the polish. His buttons, a few
hours previously dull and tarnished by the clammy air of the trenches
and the chemical effect of the bursting shells, now glittered
resplendent in the sunshine. His reddish moustache had been brushed
and coaxed into a certain state of subservience, although subduing
the stubbly bristles had taken the private almost an hour of hard
work. His cap was tilted on the back of his head revealing a
well-oiled and studiously arranged "quiff" of fiery-tinted hair.

"Wot cheer, mate!" exclaimed George. "Where 'ave you been?"

"Orderly-room," replied Ralph.

"Blimey, that's where I'm off to," rejoined Anderson. "Your pal the
hacter bloke is warned too. It's abart that bloomin' Tank business.
Ain't this yere child correct?"

"It is," assented Setley.

"I knowed it," declared Ginger with conviction. "Wot did yer get?"

"The colonel complimented me," replied Ralph tactfully.

"That all? Blow me tight! I was reckonin' on 'aving seven days'
special leave an' a free ticket to Blighty an' back."

Ginger walked away, his step a little less jaunty than before.

At tea-time the three comrades met. Ginger was radiant.

"The old man 'e told me I was a bloomin' corporal, and that I was to
'ave the bloomin' D.C.M.," he reported.

"'Any chance of getting back to Blighty on leave just ter show me
medal off, sir?' I asked; an' blow me if 'e didn't get the
orderly-room sergeant to make me a pass straight away. I'm off
to-night, an' chance me arm over them U-boats. 'E's a toff is the
colonel."

"And he thought fit to bestow a sergeant's chevrons on your humble,"
announced Alderhame. "The distinction of the D.C.M. is also thrown in
as a makeweight."

"Congratulations, both of you," said Ralph heartily.

"Thanks; and what did you get?" asked Alderhame pointedly.

"'E swears 'e only got complimented," interjected Ginger. "All my
bloomin eye, eh, wot?"

Alderhame winked solemnly.

"Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice," he quoted. "I can
guess--you lucky young dog!"




CHAPTER XII

"THE BEST OF LUCK"


A WEEK later Ralph Setley was given his commission and appointed to
the Tank Service. He shrewdly suspected that the colonel of the
Wheatshires had put in a strong recommendation on his behalf, and in
this surmise he was not mistaken.

With the commission ten days' leave was granted to enable the newly
fledged subaltern to obtain his kit, and in high spirits Ralph set
out for England.

He parted with his former comrades with genuine regret. Despite
danger, discomforts, and the rough life he had had a rattling good
time in the ranks. Looking back he dwelt only on the bright side of a
Tommy's existence. The men of his late platoon were equally hearty
and embarrassingly outspoken in their appreciation of Ralph's good
luck, because he deserved it. It was not a case of promotion through
favouritism: individual merit and devotion to duty had earned a
fitting reward.

At Boulogne he alighted in company with hundreds of officers and men,
the former clad in "warms," the latter in goatskin coats with the
trench mud adhering to their uniforms and boots. All were in high
good humour, for were they not bound back to Blighty. A long hospital
train had come in, and hale and wounded were cheek by jowl until they
set out on the sea-journey--the former by returning transports, the
latter in the distinctively painted hospital ships that are
occasionally marked down as victims by the recreant and despicable
U-boat pirates.

"Hullo, Setley!"

Ralph stopped and turned his head, unable at first to locate the
direction from which the hail proceeded.

A man lying on a stretcher resting on the platform had attracted his
attention. Ralph failed to recognize the voice, nor could he
recognize the speaker. The latter was partly covered with a blanket.
His left arm was bandaged, while his head was swathed with dressings
to such an extent that only the nose and one eye were visible.

"Hullo, yourself!" replied Setley. "Sorry, but I can't recognize
you."

"What, forgotten your old platoon sergeant?" rejoined the wounded
man.

"Sergeant Ferris!" exclaimed Ralph. "Why, we were told that you had
been done in--blown to bits."

"Not so very far wrong," replied Ferris, as Ralph placed a cigarette
between the sergeant's lips and lighted it. "I copped it properly.
Lifted off my feet by a shell, then a machine-gun played the deuce. I
got in the next night and here I am."

Ferris's brief statement hardly did justice to the man's grit. The
calf of the right leg had been pulverized by half a dozen
machine-guns bullets, although the shin bone had escaped injury. Two
bullets had completely pierced the left ankle. These wounds, combined
with shell-shock, rendered the sergeant unconscious. When he came to,
the Wheatshires had retired to the captured second line trench and he
found himself in the open. Indomitably he started to crawl back.
Every inch of the way was fraught with agony. At length he approached
a sunken road, but just as he was about to drag himself over the edge
a sniper shot him through the chest. At the time he was almost
unaware of the fact, except that he felt a sharp twinge, which he put
down to a scratch from part of his equipment, but when he gained the
sunken lane he again swooned from loss of blood.

Upon regaining consciousness he found that it was night. A burning
thirst gripped his throat, and increased his physical torments.
Doggedly he began to crawl again, although he could hardly hold his
head up clear of the mud. The contents of a water-bottle that had
belonged to a dead German revived him considerably, and in spite of
frequent rests his progress along the sunken lane was slowly and
steadily maintained, until through sheer exhaustion he fell into a
fitful sleep.

With daybreak his troubles increased. The Huns begun shelling the
sunken road, while the British guns also began to pound the same
spot. Crawling into a crater Ferris hugged the muddy earth, expecting
every minute to be blown to atoms by the bursting high explosives. It
was then that he received a scalp wound and a fragment of shell in
his wrist. Throughout the long-drawn day he lay in his frail shelter
while the mutual "strafe" continued. At night he resumed his
pilgrimage of agony and finally reached the British lines to find
that his regiment had been relieved by the Downshires.

"Yes," he continued, puffing contentedly at the cigarette Ralph had
given him. "I'm just off to Blighty for a rest cure, then I guess
I'll be back in time for the Final Push. Wouldn't miss that for
worlds, and the boys are doing great things, I hear. Where are you
off to, Setley? Blighty, too. You're mighty lucky to get away. Some
chaps have been months out here without having a sniff of home. Got a
commission, eh? Well, sir, the best of luck."

Two bearers raised the stretcher and Sergeant Ferris was borne off on
another stage of the journey of pain, yet happy at the thought that a
guerdon awaited him--the sight of his native land.

The Cross-Channel passage was accomplished in safety, thanks to the
efficient escort provided by the Senior Service, and just as it was
getting dark Ralph landed at Folkestone. The train from Charing Cross
conveying leave-expired men had just arrived, and the double stream
of troops, some with their faces Francewards, others with their backs
to the Front for a few brief days, jostled on the landing-stage.

"Blimey, if it ain't young Setley!" exclaimed a well-known voice.
"'Ere, Aldy, where are yer?"

And Ginger Anderson gripped Ralph's hand and jerked it like a
pump-handle.

"So they let yer off? Lucky blighter! you've got your leave to come.
We've 'ad ours, worse luck."

"Cheer-o!" was Alderhame's greeting. "How are things?"

Briefly Ralph explained the nature of his hurried visit home.

"Told you so," said Alderhame. "I knew it meant a pip on your collar.
Well, the best of luck."

"Judging by the number of times I've been wished that I ought to have
it," rejoined Ralph. "And I believe I was born on a Friday."

"Suppose we ought to salute?" said Ginger.

"I believe the idea is that one salutes the King's uniform, and I
haven't got it yet," replied Ralph.

"You salute the uniform not the man," agreed Alderhame.

"Don't know so much abart that," added Ginger reminiscently. "I got
seven days C.B. for not saluting my company officer, an' e was in
plain clothes; so 'ow abart it? If it's the bloomin' uniform you
salutes then why the dooce don't a Tommy kow-tow to every blessed
uniform he sees in a tailor's shop?"

"Give it up," declared Sergeant Alderhame. "Well, Ralph, we'll be
sorry to lose you, but jolly glad you've pulled off a commission.
With the Tanks, too. That's good business. If there's a chance and
you're want of a sergeant then you might bear in mind your old pal."

"I won't forget," replied Setley. "So long."

"Shan't be sorry to get across ter France," declared Ginger. "Not
that I want ter find myself in those blinkin' trenches: the chap wot
swears 'e likes that sort o' life is a bloomin' prevaricator. When we
get a move on it's different. But wot I wants ter get across for is a
good square bust-out: bully beef an' spuds. Honest, I ain't 'ad me
teeth inside a tater the whole time I've bin 'ere. Fed up with
Blighty, that's wot I am."

"You're not the only one who had to go without potatoes," added
Alderhame. "There's an artificial shortage everywhere; those rascally
profiteers have been at it again. Just fancy, our little town was
quite without spuds, and yet a neighbouring landowner had thirty tons
of potatoes under straw--to feed his brothers later on."

"His brothers?" queried Ralph.

"Ay," continued Alderhame, with a laugh. "In other words, his pigs."

The order to "Fall in" ended the interview. The heavily laden
Tommies, bent under the weight of their packs and equipment, prepared
to embark while Setley made his way to the train.

The next few days passed only too quickly. Hurried visits to the
Stores, receiving the congratulations of his numerous acquaintances,
modestly relating his adventures to his admiring relatives and going
into dozens of personal matters that claimed his attention--these
were but a few of the things that occupied the young
second-lieutenant's time. The while he was consumed with impatience
to take up his new duties. Reports from the Front hinted of important
events in the immediate future. Something big was in the air. A
"push," long-promised and compared with which the previous
operations, magnificent though they were, would be entirely dwarfed,
was imminent. At last the British Empire, ever backward in
preparation, had more than caught up with her Germanic rival, and
with quiet confidence millions of the subjects of King George awaited
the news that at last the Huns were being thrown back towards the
banks of the Rhine.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BEGINNING OF THE GREATER PUSH


"HAIG has occupied Bapaume and PÃ©ronne, encountering little
opposition."

Such was the news that greeted second-lieutenant Ralph Setley on
disembarking at Boulogne. Bapaume and PÃ©ronne--places that for
months and months had been practically within sight of the British
trenches, and yet seemed as far remote as Peru. Miles and miles of
deep concrete reinforced earthworks, hundreds of machine-guns, acres
of formidable barbed wire, and the pick of the Kaiser's legions, had
been in front of those two towns; and yet the Huns had
gone--retreated.

"A voluntary retirement, according to our plans." Ralph smiled when
he read the mendacious German official report. Can any sane
individual imagine a voluntary retirement in these circumstances.
After two years of hard work, fortifying and defending those deep-dug
trenches, would any belligerent voluntarily abandon ground gained and
maintained at such a cost of blood and treasure?

At a certain place, well behind the lines, Ralph was put through a
hurried yet comprehensive "course" in Tank work. In company with half
a dozen other young subalterns, he was under instruction from morning
to night, with only brief intervals for meals. It would be difficult
to find a squad more eager to grasp the intricacies of their future
commands. They were, one and all, as "keen as mustard." Technical and
practical work, intermixed with lectures on motors, machine-guns and
quickfirers, hints on strategy and tactics, map-reading and
dynamics--all were drummed into the active brains of the
probationers, regardless of the adage, "A little knowledge is a
dangerous thing."

"Dangerous for the Boches, let's hope," remarked Danvers, a young
second-lieutenant recently transferred from the Air Service, owing to
a wound that rendered him unfit to fly, although his capacity in
other directions was unimpaired. He had chummed up with Setley, and
the two got on admirably. In private life Danvers had been a civil
engineer, until the call of the sword took him from the plane-table
and theodolite to the sterner profession of war.

"I want to impress upon you fellows," said the major--who acted as
instructor--"that you must not run away with the idea that landships
are invulnerable."

The class nodded their heads sagely. Considering most of them had
seen derelict Tanks--in many cases showing huge rents in their
armoured sides, caused by the impact of heavy shells--this
announcement seemed superfluous.

"However useful the Tanks have been and are," continued the major,
"they have their limitations. They are not perfect. Perfection means
finality--and the end is not yet. Landships are a means to an end,
nothing more. So don't run away with the idea that you can do
anything when in charge of a Tank. It will do a lot. As an adjunct to
an infantry attack it is most efficient. When first brought into
action landships scored heavily, owing to their novel
characteristics. The Huns have now found certain means to counter
their offensive, and these means must in turn be negatived. So in the
attack exercise discretion until you are astride the enemy trenches.
Then you can go for all you're worth. Self-sacrifice is commendable
in certain circumstances, but little is gained if you blunder into a
pitfall through sheer impetuosity."

Instructor No. 2 adopted a different line.

"Tanks attacking in company," he declared, "should advance straight
for their objective and at their maximum speed. Preferably the
formation should be _en Ã©chelon_; then, should the leading landship
be 'bogged,' the others will have a chance to avoid the pitfall."

Then came the actual practice. Across ground gradually increasing in
difficulty the instruction Tanks were taken, first with a qualified
hand in charge of each and then with one of the new hands in command.
At the end of a few days Ralph was "passed out" as being competent to
take a landship into action.

It took two days to bring his command up to the Front. Too heavy and
unwieldy to be conveyed by rail the landship squadron lumbered
towards the Arras sector, in company with hundreds of guns of all
calibres, enormous lorries crammed with shells, and transport of all
descriptions laden with munitions and food. Dense columns of marching
infantry, regiments in motor waggons, individual units, were swarming
everywhere, the Tommies marching with elastic gait and resolute mien,
confident that once more the German arms were about to suffer defeat.

"It's Easter Day," observed Danvers, when the Tanks were "parked" for
the night and concealed from the prying eyes of a chance hostile
airman--the Hun fliers were very chary of late of venturing over the
British lines--by means of futurist-painted canvas. "Rummiest Easter
I've ever spent. Wonder if the Huns use a similar form of service to
ours. Can you imagine the Germans making use of the words of the
Litany: 'To have pity upon all prisoners and captives'?"

"From all accounts they are badly using our men who have had the
ill-luck to fall into their hands," said Setley. "A platoon of the
Chalkshires got cut off, I hear. The men are kept in the German
reserve trenches."

"Yes," added another subaltern. "And our fellows are mad about it.
The Huns will feel sorry for themselves when the infantry go over the
top and get to work with the bayonet. Hullo! the great strafe is
commencing."

The artillery fire, constant for the last twenty-four hours, was
increasing in violence. The guns of all sizes, from the giant
twelve-inch to the fifteen-pounders, were belching forth their hail
of devastating projectiles upon the enemy trenches. Vainly the German
guns attempted to reply. Literally pulverized by an immensely
superior weight of metal, their efforts were hardly of consequence.

"Does a fellow good to see that," observed a grey-haired major, as he
watched the incessant glare of the shells bursting in the Hun
trenches. "We're top-dog now. I remembered at Ypres we were battered
for a week or more and hardly able to reply. Now the boot is on the
other foot, and, you fellows, wait till the morning. We've a nice
little surprise for Fritz."

There was no sleep that night for the officers and men of the Tanks.
All inclination to rest was dispelled by the stupendous violence of
the bombardment. The night was rendered as light as day by the
incessant flashes, the din was indescribable, while the earth
trembled with the crash of the guns.

Rapidly the "dump" diminished, but as fast as the reserve of stacked
shells was exhausted more were brought up. The dragon's teeth of
ancient Greek mythology were not in it: the projectiles at the
disposal of the hardworked but enthusiastic gunners were greater in
number as the hours sped. Thanks to the splendid organization of the
munition workers at home, the artillery was not in danger of being
starved.

"There won't be any work left for us to do," remarked Danvers. "The
German trenches must be flattened out by this time."

"You'll soon see," rejoined a lieutenant, consulting his watch. "It's
now close on five. The infantry go over the top at the half-hour.
Hullo! here's the C.O. It's about time we started."

Already the men had stripped the canvas coverings from the massive
mobile fortresses. The roar of the exhausts almost drowned the
thunder of the guns. The air reeked with petrol vapour, mingled with
the acrid, pungent fumes from the cordite charges from the nearest
batteries.

"All correct, sir," replied Ralph's sergeant, as the subaltern
scrambled through the narrow armoured door in the afterside of the
sponson and gained the complicated interior of the Tank.

Setley gave the word and the mammoth ambled off, fifty yards in the
wake of another Tank, three others following at regular intervals. It
was still night. Dawn was close at hand, but any indications of the
break of day were concealed by the huge clouds of smoke that hung in
impenetrable curtains over the German lines. It was snowing. Frozen
flakes were whirling through the smoke-laden air. In places the
ground was covered to a depth of four or five inches, although
everywhere the pure white mantle was rapidly churned into brownish
slush by the constant movement of vehicles and men.

Half-past five. To the second the British guns lifted, raining their
hail of projectiles on the hostile support trenches and putting up
such a tremendous barrage that no living thing could endure in that
sector of bursting shells. To those of the high explosive type were
added others of a terrible but totally different character. Fritz was
being paid back in his own coin and with compound interest. Oft-times
the cultured Huns had made use of liquid fire--a hideous barbaric
means of attack. Retaliations had been reluctantly decided upon by
the British authorities. At last the time-honoured maxim, "an eye for
an eye, a tooth for a tooth," was being put into force.

Splendid in their terrible work, the liquid fire shells burst with
admirable precision over the crowded reserve trenches. Unable to
retreat owing to the barrage, reluctant to face the bombs and
bayonets of the British infantry as they kept pace with the lifting
artillery fire, the Germans were trapped.

Almost without meeting any resistance the Tommies swarmed over the
hostile trenches, and soon a steady, ever-increasing stream of
prisoners--men dazed with the horror of the bombardment, hungry,
dirty, and devoid of spirit--set in towards the advance cages.

"We're out of it this trip," thought Ralph. "There's nothing for the
Tanks to do. By Jove, there is, though! A viper's nest wants
flattening out."




CHAPTER XIV

THE COMMAND OF A TANK


SECOND-LIEUTENANT SETLEY'S attention had been directed to a
machine-gun emplacement that, notwithstanding the terrific pounding
of the Hun lines, had somehow escaped the general demolition. It
stood in a slight hollow, the dip in the ground enabling the
machine-guns to fire diagonally across the line of advancing troops
and, incidentally, into the crowd of demoralized Hun prisoners.
Although the arc of fire was limited, the result was hardly less
efficacious on that account.

The harmless splaying of bullets upon the Tank's armoured side had
drawn Ralph's attention to the source of the hail of small missiles.
He could discern the domed tops of the three portable steel cupolas
in which the machine-guns were housed. Evidently these metal defence
works had been kept in a deep dug-out during the bombardment, and
when the British guns lifted had been raised from the bowels of the
earth--giving trouble and asking for it.

Round swung the Tank, slowly, ponderously. Her "tail"--the pair of
wheels used for steering purposes when on fairly level ground--was
tilted clear of the crater-pitted earth. Grimly and remorselessly she
set out to squash the viper's nest out of existence.

The Huns held on doggedly. They must have realized that they were
already cut off by swarms of British infantry, and that sooner or
later they would be "rushed" from all sides. Under the impression
that no quarter is accorded to machine-gunners the Boches determined
to fight to the last. Even the approach of the Tank, even if it spelt
doom, did not make them desert their guns and with uplifted hands
shout "Kamerad."

Right and left of the emplacement were lines of barbed wire, many of
the posts still standing; but directly in front the entanglement had
been flattened, scorched posts and short fragments of twisted wire
alone remaining to mark the position. The path for the Tank was
invitingly open, but that fact, combined with the determined stand of
the Hun machine-gunners, struck Setley as being suspicious. Either
the ground in front of the three cupolas was mined, or else a deep
pit, with vertical sides, had been dug, and concealed by means of a
covering of boards strong enough to bear the weight of a few men but
unable to withstand the 200 tons dead weight of a Tank.

With one tractor band grinding ahead and the other reversed the Tank
made a half turn in its own length and commenced to cross the front
of its objective. Then climbing the rising ground with consummate
ease the mammoth charger drew up to the flank of the machine-gunners'
lair.

The Huns in the nearest cupola promptly bolted and surrendered to the
nearest Tommies they met. Those in the second one, firing to the
last, were neatly "done in," for the Tank, charging the metal-box
obliquely, toppled it into the nearest mud and finished off by
pulverizing the light steel plating and the crew within.

The men belonging to the third machine-gun, seeing that their mobile
fortress was powerless against the immensely superior weight of the
Tank, fled for the nearest dug-out. Three were shot down by the
Tank's machine-gun, while two managed to reach the doubtful shelter.
Too late they discovered that the dug-out had caved in under the
impact of a huge shell, and only the entrance and a few steps were
left.

Ralph ordered his command to be brought to a standstill. His work for
the present was accomplished. The rounding-up of the two surviving
Huns must be left to the infantry, numbers of whom were swarming over
the captured lines, securing prisoners and exploring dug-outs lest
the gentle Boches had left explosives with time-fuses in those
cavernous depths.

Setley gave a whoop of surprise and delight as a dozen Tommies
approached. They were the Wheatshires--his late regiment--and, to be
more exact, men of his former platoon. But in vain he looked for
Sergeant Alderhame. Penfold--well, he could hardly be expected to be
out at the Front so soon. But there was Sidney, the lad with Polish
blood in his veins. George Anderson, too.

Ralph felt tempted to shout as the little Cockney dashed past the
stationary Tank. With his rifle slung across his back, and a bomb
held ready to hurl, Ginger was the personification of activity and
alertness. He had spotted the two Huns in the mouth of the dug-out.
It would be obviously unwise for Ralph to attract the bomber's
attention.

"Up with yer dooks!" shouted Ginger, swinging the bomb.

One of the men obeyed promptly, begging the while for quarter.

"Course you'll save your hide, Fritz," said his conqueror
encouragingly. "Mike, take that blighter out of it, will yer?"

Remained one Hun, a tall, broad-shouldered lout, with a face that had
animal cunning and ferocity written on every line of it. He stood
with his rifle and bayonet at the "ready." His last cartridge had
been spent. He was determined to fight to the last.

"Up with 'em!" yelled Ginger, brandishing the Mills bomb, while other
men of the platoon gradually closed in upon the solitary Prussian.

The Hun made no attempt to comply. Snarling, he lunged ineffectually
at a Wheatshire who had come almost within reach of the glittering
steel.

"Hanged if I can do the bloomer in with this," exclaimed Ginger,
placing his supply of bombs on the ground and grasping his rifle.

"Form a ring, chums, an' see fair play. Now, Fritz, it's either you
or me."

"I haf no chance," replied the Prussian. "If out I come der odders
vill shoot in my back."

"Don't talk rot, Dutchy," protested Anderson. "We ain't 'Uns. Either
'ands up or fight me!"

The Prussian had more faith in a British Tommy's word than he had in
his own. Still snarling, he emerged cautiously from his retreat;
then, finding that no attempt was made on the part of the other men
to molest him, he crouched behind his bayonet and stealthily
approached the imperturbable Cockney.

With a longer reach and armed with a rifle and bayonet of greater
length than the British service weapon the Hun had a certain
advantage; but lack of initiative and the slowness of his mental and
physical powers neutralized his ascendancy over the short, sturdily
built Wheatshire corporal.

Thrice the steel crossed. Once the Prussian's bayonet rasped against
the wood casing of Ginger's rifle--a foiled effort to cripple his
antagonist's fingers. By a brilliant parry Anderson knocked the point
aside, and the next instant his bayonet was thrust deeply into the
Hun's body.

"Well done, Ginger!" shouted his comrades.

"Too bloomin' well done," rejoined the victor. "'Ere, you chaps,
who's gotter fust-aid dressin'? Mine's been kippered. Thanks, mate."

And almost before the heat of the combat had had time to cool
Anderson was on his knees by the side of his late adversary, working
diligently to staunch the flow of blood from the wound that he had
made.

"Yer asked for it properly, Fritz," he exclaimed. "Why didn't yer put
yer bloomin' 'ands up when I told yer?"

In answer, the wounded Hun turned his head and bit the hand of the
man who was tending him.

"Yer rotten cannibal!" ejaculated Ginger, and disregarding the advice
of his comrades to knock the fellow over the head, Anderson gathered
up his bombs, slung his rifle over his shoulder, and vanished from
Setley's view.

By this time the battle had rolled onwards. Away on the right German
shells were pounding the slopes of Vimy Ridge. That was a good sign.
It proved that the British troops had secured a footing in what was
unquestionably a key to this section of the hostile line.

Hindenburg had had his wish gratified--to meet the British in the
open. He had failed to gain anything by it. In trench warfare the New
Army had proved itself superior to the product of the German High
Command, and now, with their trenches left miles in the rear, the
Tommies were "mopping up" the Huns as neatly as the most exacting
commander could wish.

And yet an admirable restraint was noticeable in the movements of the
attacking troops. In the heat of the battle and joy of victory it was
pardonable for the men to wish to push on beyond the protection of
their artillery. With a very few exceptions the various units kept
well under control. Never was the maxim "Hasten slowly" better
applied.

A motor-cyclist, riding furiously and yet avoiding the yawning shell
craters with a dexterity acquired by long practice, pulled up by the
side of the stationary Tank. With the engine still running and
keeping the machine balanced by placing one foot on the ground, the
grimy mud-caked dispatch rider delivered his message.

"There's a Tank bogged fifty yards south-east of Henricourt Farm,
sir," he reported. "The CO. sends orders for you to proceed to her
assistance."

"Very good," replied Setley, and closing and locking the door, he
gave instructions for full speed ahead to the aid of his crippled
consort.




CHAPTER XV

THE BOGGED LANDSHIP


FULL speed ahead represented a speed of nearly ten miles an hour, not
taking into consideration detours and slowing down to avoid craters
and other obstructions. Henricourt Farm, Ralph found by consulting
his large scale map, was approximately two miles away, and on the
eastern slope of Vimy Ridge. Barring accidents, the Tank ought to be
on the spot in fifteen minutes.

Already the motor-cyclist dispatch-rider was speeding over the rough
ground on his return journey. Setley could not help admiring the
pluck and determination of the man. Not only had he to avoid
shell-holes, heaps of debris and stray strands of barbed wire, but
the while desultory shells from the German long-distance guns were
"watering" the ground in a vain hope of checking the irresistible
British advance.

Even as Ralph looked a projectile struck the ground almost under the
dispatch-rider's front wheel. With a lurid flash the shell burst,
throwing masses of earth in all directions. Through the
yellowish-green smoke the subaltern had a momentary glimpse of the
motor-bike flying in one direction, the rider in another.

"Gone West, poor fellow," thought Ralph; but almost the next instant
the man picked himself up and staggered towards the prostrate
machine. The motor-cycle had finished its career. It consisted mostly
of a tangled mass of steel and a grotesquely bent petrol tank.

"We'll have that fellow in," said Setley to his sergeant--a
trustworthy non-com. of the name of Archer. "Tell him to look sharp
about it."

Although the sergeant shouted at the top of his stentorian voice to
the dispatch-rider he paid no attention. Either the roar of the
distant guns drowned his words, or else the man had been rendered
deaf by the concussion. To remain there in the open was to court
death from bullets which were "plonking" sullenly into the sodden
earth.

"Shell-shock, sir, that's what it is," declared Sergeant Archer.
"I'll fetch him in."

A shell bursting eighty yards away sent fragments rattling harmlessly
on the Tank's armoured side. The dispatch-rider never turned his
head. It was a clear proof that he had lost his sense of hearing.

Descending from the comparative security of the landship Archer raced
across the intervening distance. It was not until he touched the
unfortunate man on the shoulder that the latter was aware of his
presence. He stared vacantly at the non-com., then pointed to the
wreckage of his motor-cycle, but although his lips moved he was
unable to utter a sound. It was a bad case of shell-shock. Without
sustaining visible injury, he had been deprived of both speech and
hearing.

Archer pointed towards the waiting Tank, but the man obstinately
shook his head and turned his attention once more to the smashed
motor-cycle.

"It's nah-poo!" yelled the non-com. "You come along with me at once."

The vocal effect was completely thrown away, and when Archer gripped
the man's arm the dispatch-rider resisted strenuously.

Just then another motor-cyclist dashed up. He was riding with a set
purpose, and could not stop to see what was wrong. Crippled
motor-bikes were too common objects. Like the Levite, he passed by on
the other side.

Close behind came another motor-cyclist He evidently was returning,
having accomplished his errand, and was merely indulging in a
friendly "speed-burst" with the other man. Slowing down he came to a
standstill, and surveyed the wrecked machine.

"What's wrong, chum?" he asked inconsequently.

"He's got shell-shock, and is as obstinate as a mule," declared
Archer.

There was method in his obstinacy, for seeing one of his own men the
disabled dispatch-rider fumbled in his pouch and produced a sealed
envelope.

The new-comer glanced at the address and the endorsement, "Highly
urgent!"

"All right, chum; I'll see to it," said the man, and with a flying
start he leapt into his saddle and rode furiously away.

A look of satisfaction spread over the face of the speechless
motor-cyclist, then, staggering, he fell unconscious into the arms of
Sergeant Archer, as a shell whizzing a couple of feet over the
non-com.'s head buried itself deep in the ground, fortunately without
exploding.

Willing hands relieved the sergeant of his burden and lifted the
unconscious soldier into the Tank. A precious three minutes had been
lost, but, did Ralph but know it, the retransmission of the dispatch
was of far more vital importance than the work of succouring the
stranded landship.

But by the time Setley's Tank arrived upon the scene the situation
was serious enough. The bogged consort was lying on the floor of a
vertical pit twenty feet in depth--a cunningly devised trap right in
front of a hitherto masked position, where nearly a hundred of the
Prussian Guard, supported by a strong machine-gun detachment, still
held out.

Into the pit the Huns were lobbing bombs galore. These did but little
damage, although the fumes were trying the crew of the trapped
mammoth very severely, and, to make matters worse, the enemy had
brought up a liquid flame apparatus from an undemolished dug-out and
were about to squirt a fiery stream upon the helpless and hapless
Tankers.

In front of the position lay between forty and fifty dead or wounded
Highlanders--reserves, who, caught in the open while advancing in
support of an Irish battalion, had been surprised and mown down by
machine-gun fire. The wily Prussians had lain low when the first wave
of British had swept over their trenches, and by one of those
inexplicable omissions a detachment had not been left to consolidate
and clear up the captured ground.

Several of the wounded Jocks frantically cheered the oncoming Tank,
at the same time shouting warnings that there was a pitfall in front.
Some of them actually staggered to their feet, and grasping their
rifles followed the ponderous landship as it approached the ridge
held by the men of the Prussian Guard.

Almost at the brink of the exposed trap Setley brought his command to
a halt. While the quickfirers and machine-guns replied most
effectually to the Boches' fire the subaltern examined from the
interior of the Tank the nature and extent of the barrier that lay
betwixt him and the enemy.

The pit measured roughly fifty feet by thirty. A little less than
half of the covering still remained--fir planks covered with a few
inches of clay that harmonized with the surrounding ground. Unless
the Huns had constructed another pitfall alongside this one, it would
be practicable to pass it by keeping a few yards to the left.

The roof of the trapped Tank was plainly visible, but there were no
signs of any of her crew. In their unenviable position they could do
nothing in self-defence. The edge of the pit intervened between the
muzzles of the Tank's guns and the hostile trench, but this did not
prevent the Huns hurling their bombs over the parapet into the pit.

There was no chance of extricating the snared mastodon. Unlike the
one that was towed out of action when Setley, then a mere private,
played such a daring part, the Tank was penned in by the four
vertical sides of the deep cavity--climbing a vertical wall of stiff
clay is one of the accomplishments that a Tank cannot do. Later on,
when the foe were cleared away, gangs of men would be set to work to
dig an inclined plane, up which the ponderous machine would be able
to climb to the open ground.

Heaving a sigh of relief as his command safely negotiated the passage
past the hidden end of the obstruction, Ralph steered straight for
the strongly held earthwork. The Huns, working fervently to get their
diabolical fire-squirting apparatus in order, held their ground.
Seeking cover behind sand-bags hastily thrown across the floor of the
trench, and crouching in the concreted entrances to their dug-outs,
they hailed bullets against the avenging Tank's blunt, armour-plated
nose. Bombs, too, burst with an appalling clatter above and below the
stupendous moving fortress.

The crew gave good measure in exchange. With their machine-guns
spitting venomously and the quickfirers barking loudly the British
accounted for numbers of their foes, while the Tank set to work
systematically to level the barbed wire and flatten out the parapet
of sand-bags.

In their puny rage several of the Huns closed round the Tank. Immune
from the fire of her machine-guns they rained blows with axes at her
tractor-bands, and even attempted to check the resistless, crushing
motion by means of crossbars. All in vain: like a hippopotamus beset
with a swarm of flies the Tank continued its dignified progress,
levelling all that came in its way; until with the now monotonous cry
of "Kamerad," the surviving Prussians surrendered.

"Let a couple of Jocks take 'em back, sir," suggested Sergeant
Archer. "All the stuffing's knocked out of them, I guess."

A few slightly wounded Highlanders cheerfully accepted the
commission. Thirty badly scared Prussian Guardsmen, deprived of their
arms and accoutrements, meekly submitted to be marched off under the
escort of the indomitable Scotsmen, while in order to ingratiate
themselves with their captors the Huns voluntarily carried several of
the British wounded to the advanced dressing stations.

Setley's next task was to render what assistance he could to the crew
of the bogged Tank. Already the crew, finding that the mild
bombardment with bombs had ceased, had emerged from their metal-box
and were somewhat ruefully surveying the unclimbable walls of their
prison.

"Hullo, Danvers!" shouted Ralph. "Sorry you've had ill-luck. We'll
find a means to haul you out; but your bus must wait, I'm afraid."

Cautiously, and with his revolver ready for instant action, Sergeant
Archer, accompanied by two of the crew, descended into a dug-out, the
entrance of which was not blocked sufficiently to prevent squeezing
through. Within were half a dozen dead Huns--killed instantly by the
concussion of a high-explosive shell, yet without a wound on them.
Apparently, the dug-out formed the engineers' store, for there were
tools in plenty, including mattocks, spades, sectional ladders, and
ropes.

Returning with his find, the sergeant was about to report upon his
success when a bomb hurtled through the air. Instantly the three men
threw themselves flat on their faces, while a second later the
missile exploded without doing them harm beyond covering them with
mud and dust.

Starting to his feet, Archer levelled his revolver. He was at a loss
to discover the whereabouts of the thrower. It seemed as if the
missile had been projected from the Tank, until a burst of
machine-gun fire leapt from her side into the wall of earth within
three feet from the muzzle of the gun.

The landship had come to a stop immediately opposite the mouth of a
dug-out which had been so badly battered that the timber props were
leaning together like an inverted V. Within a desperate Hun still
lurked, and finding Archer and the two men in the open he had hurled
a bomb in the hope of strafing the Englishmen.

"Hands up!" shouted Archer, flattening himself against the bank of
earth by the entrance of the dug-out and firing a couple of shots
into the cavernous recess by way of adding weight to his words.

There was no reply.

"That Maxim laid the blighter out, sergeant," suggested one of the
men.

"I won't chance my arm on that," declared Archer. "Hand me that
spade."

Removing his steel helmet, the non-com. placed it on the handle of
the spade and thrust it carefully in front of the partly blocked
tunnel. Again there was no response to the silent invitation. Archer
repeated the tactics, this time exposing a little more of his metal
head-dress.

A rifle-shot rang out. The helmet was completely perforated by the
bullet.

"All right, Fritz," exclaimed the sergeant. "If you won't give in
like a sensible fellow we'll have to rout you out. I've a smoke-bomb
ready."

"Is that an English officer who speaks?" enquired the lurking German.

"A British sergeant--quite good enough for a Boche to argue with,"
retorted Archer. "So you speak English? Come out and surrender.
That's plain enough, and you know it."

"What's happening, sergeant?" asked Setley, who, screened by the
immense bulk of his Tank from the Hun's lair, had been conversing
with Danvers.

"There's a Boche in this dug-out, sir," reported the non-com. "Be
careful, sir; he chucked a bomb out just now. I believe he's an
officer, because he enquired if he was chewing his rag to a British
officer."

"I officer am," interposed the unseen. "To you I make surrender."

"Right-o," replied Ralph. "Out you come."

The head and shoulders of a Prussian appeared. Setley stepped forward
to receive his prisoner, when with a curse the treacherous Hun hurled
a bomb full at the face of the subaltern.

With outstretched hand Archer intercepted the flying missile and
hurled it whence it came, where it exploded with a hollow vibration.

"Good thing I'm a cricketer, sir," he remarked. "That ought to have
settled the swine's hash. There's no trusting a Prussian."

"Don't," ordered Ralph, as the non-com. was about to investigate.
"We'll run no unnecessary risks, but the blighter must be accounted
for. Where's a smoke-bomb?"

The Prussian officer was still alive. The mention of the word
"smoke-bomb" made him find his tongue. He had very strong objections
to being driven from his shelter like a rat from its hole. It was he
who had ordered the liquid fire apparatus to be brought to play upon
the bogged Tank, and now, when threatened with efficacious but
comparatively humane measures, he asserted that the British soldiers
were taking a mean advantage.

"You've put yourself out of court," exclaimed Setley. "For your
treachery you deserve to be exterminated; but we'll give you another
chance. Come out and we'll give you quarter. Any attempt at your
low-down games and you'll be shot down."

The Hun hesitated. Having no regard for his own plighted word, he had
doubts concerning the British officer's pledge.

"I will not surrender make," he shouted almost spluttering in his
rage. "This a magazine is. If you a smoke-bomb throw den I fire der
powder an' blow you and your landship to pieces."

"We'll risk that," replied Ralph coolly.

The bomb was tossed into the mouth of the dug-out. Nauseating,
pungent fumes wafted out. For thirty seconds there was no sign of the
Prussian. With their revolvers ready, Ralph and the sergeant crouched
by the side of the flattened trench.

Suddenly a grey-coated figure dashed through the asphyxiating smoke.
Temporarily blinded by the vapour, well nigh suffocated, the Prussian
floundered into the open air, until his bent head came into violent
contact with the side of the Tank. Like a felled ox he dropped upon
the ground.

"Blessed if he isn't the very image of Little Willie, sir," remarked
the sergeant, turning the Prussian over with his boot.

"He certainly looks a mental degenerate," agreed Ralph. "Here, stop
those men. Let them carry him in."

A batch of thirty prisoners, under the escort of an imperturbable
Tommy, came trudging across the open. They were Saxons; perhaps that
accounted for the rough handling they accorded the Prussian officer.

"I've seen the last of that gentleman, I hope," remarked Setley.
"You've found a rope? And ladders, too, I see. Look alive there."

Danvers and his men were soon extricated from the pitfall. With them
was a German colonel, a tall, sparely built man, who was trembling
violently in every limb.

"We hauled him out of a dug-out on our way up," explained Danvers.
"The old bus squatted right over the entrance, and this cheerful Hun
surrendered. We couldn't send him back. There were no men available
for that job. Besides, there was a pretty hot machine-gun fire just
then; so we hauled him on board. We hadn't gone a couple of hundred
yards when the colonel josser began to get jumpy. He jabbered away as
hard as he could, but as I don't understand the beastly Hun jargon I
told him to shut up. After all, he was trying to tell me we were
blundering into a trap--not out of consideration for us, you
understand, but because he didn't relish the big bump. It was his own
cowardly carcase of which he was thinking.

"Then came the big bump. Talk about peas in a box. They weren't in
it. Thought the Tank was going to turn upside down, but she pitched
on her nose with a terrific whump, and then settled down on an even
base.

"For nearly an hour the Boches bombed us. At first it was a jolly
disconcerting experience, and our Hun started shouting to the bombers
to stop it--the skunk! Imagine our fellows doing that. Finding that
nothing happened he quieted down a bit, until he suddenly danced up
and down regardless of the fact that he was bumping his pig-headed
skull against the roof girders. In his raving I caught the word
_Flammenwerfer_ several times, so I was forced to come to the
unpleasant conclusion that the Huns were going to strafe us with
liquid fire. Then your bus rolled up and put the lid on. The rest you
know."




CHAPTER XVI

ALDERHAME'S GOOD SHOT


A BARRAGE of shrapnel put up by the retreating enemy urged upon
Setley the necessity for taking cover. There was now no need for
further offensive work. The British infantry had occupied sufficient
front for them to consolidate. To proceed further before the
howitzers and heavy guns could be moved up to cover the advance was
injudicious. It could be done. The Tommies, in their enthusiasm,
would have pressed on miles ahead, but prudence on the part of the
cool and calculating staff officers forbade such a step.

"All aboard," ordered Ralph, and with a double crew, the captured Hun
colonel and the shell-shocked dispatch rider in addition, his
landship ambled sedately to the rear, making light of the showers of
shrapnel bullets that rattled ineffectually upon her metal hide.

Beyond the barrage she passed columns of fresh troops hurrying
forward to hold the ground gained, the men cheering the shell-splayed
Tank with the greatest enthusiasm. Other columns were overtaken,
going in the opposite direction--immense droves of muddy, dejected,
hungry Huns and a constant stream of British wounded, some lying
motionless upon stretchers, others being supported by their less
wounded comrades or else hobbling along unaided save for the
assistance of a rifle used as a crutch. Even in their pain the
gallant Tommies cheered the returning landship, and exchanged jests
with those of the crew who in their exuberance had climbed upon her
curved roof.

Guns, too, were going in both directions, the British heavies as fast
as gangs of skilled men laid sections of railway lines--the work
proceeding at a rate that would astonish even the most hustling
Yankee. British horses, too, were making for the rear, dragging
captured German artillery, floundering gallantly through the mud as
if conscious of sharing in the glory of the day.

Ralph's task was not complete with the "housing" of his Tank under
its canvas cover. His report had to be written up and sent in, he had
to attend a supplementary tactical conference in order to be
acquainted with the general scheme of operations for the morrow.
Prisoners had to be interrogated, maps studied--in short, sheer hard
mental work following upon a task of hard and arduous activity, until
utterly fagged he was glad to snatch a few hours' rest before
renewing a close acquaintance with the Huns.

He fell into a deep dreamless slumber, that even the ceaseless
thunder of the guns, that hurled their terrible missiles upon the
German positions, failed to disturb.

Just after midnight Setley was roused by a hand shaking his shoulder.
Sitting up, yet sufficiently cautious to avoid bumping his head
against the beams of the dug-out, he found Danvers by the side of the
bundle of straw that formed his bed.

"A plane has been strafing us," announced his brother-officer.
"'Fraid some of the plums dropped precious close to our buses. Come
along and see if there's any damage."

Setley went out, shivering in the cold night air. It was a starless
night. The lurid flash of the guns lighted the horizon and threw
vague shadows across the crater-pitted ground that a few days
previously had been the No Man's Land of the contending forces. It
was now three miles to the rear of the advancing British line.

A crowd of officers and men wearing steel helmets and great-coats
poured across the ground, all making towards the spot where the Tanks
were "parked."

"All right, sir," Setley heard one of the sentries report to the
senior major. "They did fall a bit close, sir, but not near enough to
do any damage."

"Thank goodness!" ejaculated Ralph, but to satisfy himself he
approached the landship under his command. Not even the canvas
covering was injured, although two Tanks in the vicinity had had
their wrappings torn off by the blast of the exploding bomb.

"The fellow evidently knows where the Tanks are," observed Danvers.
"Deucedly funny how these Huns find out things behind our lines, and
yet not a single enemy airman has ventured over in daylight for the
last week. Eh, what's that?"

A Tommy, hurrying past, had shouted some information to a pal.
Halting, he repeated the news to the subaltern, speaking with a grim
relish.

"'E dropped two bombs, sir, smack into No. 9 Advance Cage, sir. Never
seen such a blessed mess in all me life. I'll allow there are a
couple o' hundred prisoners snuffed out. Anyway, they've got
something to be thankful for. Their carcases won't be used for pigs'
food."

"That knocks your information theory on the head," observed Ralph.
"The airman evidently trusted to luck and it played a shabby trick on
the prisoners."

"Not at all," said Danvers stoutly. "He was trying for the Tanks. The
fact that a cage was within five hundred yards of them didn't trouble
him at all. Cannon fodder, you see; once these Huns are prisoners
they cease to count in the estimation of the German High Command.
That's why it is not advisable to commit reprisals upon prisoners.
Such a step wouldn't affect the Huns in the slightest. It's a safe
card to bombard their 'open' towns by way of reprisals. That makes
them squeal."

"Let's be getting back," suggested Ralph, stifling a yawn.

"Wish I could," rejoined his companion, consulting the luminous dial
of his watch. "Unfortunately I'm down for duty at one-thirty."

"What's up, then?" enquired Setley.

"Over there," replied Danvers, pointing towards the front trenches.
"They've had a squad from a Labour Battalion hard at it, digging a
path for my bus. I was warned to be there at the time I mentioned.
Wanted to hang on all the while, but there was that strafed official
enquiry."

"I'll go with you," suggested Ralph.

"You're dog tired," objected his chum.

"Not at all," protested Setley. "I'll go. It'll give me an appetite
for breakfast, don't you see. I heard that there was to be a
variation from the almost everlasting bully beef. There's bacon,
Danvers, actually bacon."

"Good!" exclaimed the subaltern. "Let's hope it won't be like the
last I tasted. The stuff must have chummed up with the dead end of a
poison gas shell. Ugh! It put me off entirely."

"Know the way?" asked Ralph.

"Rather," was the confident reply. "And I guess we won't be lonely.
There's plenty of life along the path--and death, too," he added
gravely. "We'll follow the track of the Tank."

The well-defined path flattened out by the tractors of Setley's Tank
on its return journey afforded a sure guide, although the compressed
mud was covered with two or three inches of water. Nevertheless the
two officers proceeded with caution; there was no knowing whether a
hostile shell or two had pitched after the landship's return, in
which case there was a possibility of tumbling into five or six feet
of icy-cold water that had drained into the recently formed crater.

"Fritz is still getting badly strafed." observed Danvers, for the
guns were thundering unceasingly. The horizon facing the two
subalterns was one series of lurid flashes as the British shells
pounded the German lines. Haig was taking no unnecessary risks. He
was not a leader to needlessly sacrifice his men in costly frontal
attacks in close formation. That was a German method of military
warfare that had not been accepted by other nations as an essential
to success.

There was a certain mistiness in the air. The stars were obscured.
The faint breeze hardly disturbed the huge clouds of orange-tinted
smoke that stood out clearly against the darkness. Away in the
distance a huge conflagration showed that the British shells had set
fire to a German "dump," or else the Huns were up to their latest
display of _kultur_--setting fire to a village before "voluntarily
retiring to fresh positions."

Contrary to Danvers' expectations their journey was not overburdened
with company. The reliefs had gone; the wounded had been carried off.
A few "sanitary squads," searching in the darkness, were the only men
they met during the first mile of the way.

An aeroplane droned overhead. Neither of the subalterns paid much
heed to it. Aviators [unreadable text] night and day were as common
as [unreadable text] in the early autumn. Ralph [unreadable text]ver,
that it was flying low, its [unreadable text] silhouetted against the
glare on the sky-line.

"Beastly cold job," remarked Danvers. "All[unreadable text] in summer, but on a
night like this----"

"He's planing down," said Setley. "He's shut off his motor."

"So he is," agreed Ralph's companion. "Wonder why? I shouldn't think
a fellow would make a landing here for choice."

They plodded on for another two hundred yards. Suddenly a guttural
voice shouted, "_Wer da?_"

"Huns!" whispered Ralph. Both officers drew their revolvers.

"Are you in need of assistance?" asked Setley in German.

"No, but repairs will take two hours," was the reply. Then, after a
pause, "How far am I from Douai?"

Setley thought fit to enlighten the Hun, who had evidently lost his
bearings in addition to sustaining damage to his machine. By
enquiring for Douai, where the Germans had an aviation ground, the
Boche had given himself away.

"Quite an impossible distance, Herr Aviatiker," responded Ralph.
"Meanwhile, you are our prisoner. Surrender instantly."

Even then the German failed to grasp the significance of the
position.

"Surrender yourselves," he retorted, and placing a whistle to his
lips he blew three short blasts. "Our patrols will be up at once,
Englishmen," he added, "so do not give increasing trouble."

Another airman joined the first--the observer most likely. Dark forms
were approaching. These gave the Huns mistaken confidence, for both
began blazing away with their revolvers at Setley and his companion,
who, dropping on one knee, promptly returned the compliment.

"Hullo!" bawled an unmistakably English voice. "What's the rumpus?"

"German airmen," shouted Ralph in reply.

"Then they're booked," rejoined the speaker.

The disconcerting nature of their blunder completely astounded the
lost airmen. Without attempting to set fire to their machine they
turned and bolted. Neither of the opposing parties had been hit in
the exchange of pistol shots. Revolver firing at sixty yards on a
misty night is not conducive to accurate aim, but with a rifle
matters are placed on a different footing.

The foremost of the approaching squad let rip. Three flashes and
three reports as one stabbed the darkness. One of the fugitives
pitched forward on his face; the other stumbled for a dozen yards and
then rolled sideways to the ground.

"Well done, Alderhame!" exclaimed Ralph.

"Dash my stars!" ejaculated the ex-actor. "I hardly expected to run
across you--'upon the vasty fields of France.'"

"What are you doing here?" asked Setley.

"Ration party, sir," replied Sergeant Alderhame. "We were hurrying
along because we were taking a cheese ration up to our chaps. The
cheese was lively when we started, so we wanted to get the stuff up
before it walked off. There's Ginger Anderson sitting on top of one
lot."

The men were all from the Wheatshires. The supplies they were
bringing up were conveyed in specially constructed wheelbarrows with
broad flanges to enable them to traverse soft ground. Until a narrow
gauge tramway was laid down this was the best means of getting
rations up to the firing line.

"I'll have a look at our birds, sir," continued Alderhame. "I'm
curious to know where they were winged."

"Be careful," cautioned Ralph. "They may be lying doggo."

"Trust me for that, sir," was the rejoinder, then telling his squad
to temporarily abandon their highly scented cargo he ordered hem to
extend and surround the place where the two airmen had fallen.

The pilot was stone dead, with a bullet-wound through the centre of
his back. The observer, hit in the thigh and shoulder, had fainted
through loss of blood. "Ripping shot that one of mine!" exclaimed
Alderhame enthusiastically. "Jolly rummy, though, I can't help
feeling like a sportsman on the moors and it's a human being I've
brought down."

"But a bloomin' Boche," added Ginger the materialist. "One the less
an' no cause to feed 'im."

By the aid of his electric torch Ralph examined the pockets of the
dead pilot, who under his leather coat wore an Iron Cross. Papers
found in his possession showed that the two men were crack Hun fliers
and had set out purposely with the intention of bombing the Tanks. In
addition the disconcerting information was forthcoming that the enemy
had learnt the precise spot in which the landships were parked, and
since no hostile machines had been over during daylight it was
reasonable to conclude a spy had given the news.

"By Jupiter! I'd like to nip the fellow," remarked Danvers, as the
two officers resumed their way. "Smart chap that, sergeant."

"One of my old chums in the Wheatshires," said Ralph. "A decent chap,
only he has the bad habit of flinging Shakespeare at your head every
half minute. I'm rather keen on getting him transferred to the Tank
Section, but haven't had the chance to work it yet."

"A handy man behind a machine-gun, I should fancy. Hullo! That was a
beauty."

A terrific burst of light, followed by half a dozen minor explosions,
occasioned Danver's exclamation. Something, far behind the German
lines, had "gone up." The British artillery were doing good work that
night.

Floundering past gaping shell-holes, for as they approached the
support trenches the craters were more numerous, the two officers
arrived at the scene of the Tank's misadventure.

"Getting along famously, sir," announced Danvers' sergeant. "These
labour chaps have been slogging in like greased lightning. Another
quarter of an hour, sir, and we'll be ready to start."

A great change had taken place in the land topography since the
morning. The pitfall lay exposed in all its nakedness--a wide yawning
cavity of which three sides were as steep and smooth as a
concrete-faced wall. The third had been attacked by the labour
troops--picked navvies of magnificent physique and thoroughly skilled
in the art of digging.

Earth had been cut away until a slope of thirty degrees formed an
inclined plane from the normal surface to the floor of the pit. The
finishing touches were being made, thick planks being put down to
form a corduroy road up the newly made path.

Members of the Tank's crew had also been hard at work fitting new
treads to parts of the tractor bands. Considering the fall the heavy
mass had come off lightly, for the injury to the wheels was the only
material damage.

Danvers surveyed his command with great satisfaction.

"I'm quite attached to the old bus," he confided to Ralph. "Of course
they would have given me another if this one had been properly
strafed, but it's simply great to get her into working order again."

"All ready, sir," reported the sergeant. The two officers entered the
steel box. The motors were purring gently and rhythmically. Amid the
cheers of the excavating squad the Tank moved slowly yet surely up
the incline, and, gaining the shell-pitted ground, waddled sedately
for her base.

"Now for a few hours' sleep," said Danvers.

Ralph stifled a yarn.

"Yes," he admitted, glancing at his wristwatch. "It's now ten minutes
past three--we've done pretty well. At five we start our day's work,
and from all accounts it's going to be a hot time."




CHAPTER XVII

THE SPY


CONTRARY to Setley's surmise the following day passed quietly--if the
term can be applied to operations on the Western Front.

"Nothing of consequence to report," was the official _communiquÃ©_,
but throughout the day the British guns thundered upon the Hun
defences. The Germans, expecting a renewed assault, were on thorns;
they were so badly hustled that they could not be urged to make a
counter-attack. Their reserves were not forthcoming owing to the
efficient barrage behind the lines.

Meanwhile the British infantry rested, consolidating their ground and
relying upon the artillery to pave the way for the assault when the
latter did take place. There are limits even to the endurance of a
Tommy, and although the men had the spirit to advance their leaders
realized that to attain the best results the operations must be the
_festina lente_ order.

So with the infantry inactive the Tanks likewise had to "stand off,"
and Ralph was fortunate in making up arrears of sleep. At three in
the afternoon Second-Lieutenant Setley was summoned to the presence
of his commanding officer.

"We're having a shuffle round," began the latter without needless
preamble. "Six additional Tanks are being sent up from the Base, and
some of the men who have had practical experience in action are to be
distributed amongst the crews of the new arrivals. That, naturally,
causes vacancies in the complements of the Tanks here already. You
sent in an application, I see, for two N.C.O.'s of the Wheatshires.
The C.O. of the Wheatshires raises no objections, Headquarters
approves, and the men are warned to join as soon as possible. I
presume you would like to have them with you?"

"Yes, sir," replied Ralph. "At the same time I should be sorry to
lose Sergeant Archer. He's a smart, hard-working, conscientious
N.C.O.----"

"I know," interrupted the C.O. "You need not have any qualms
concerning Sergeant Archer. He is to be sent on promotion to the
Ancre. Very well, then; that's settled. Good afternoon."

Ralph saluted, and withdrew, mentally declaring that the brusque C.O.
was a thorough sport. Before he had gone a hundred yards he
encountered Sergeant Alderhame and Corporal Anderson, who had just
reported themselves at Divisional Headquarters.

"You haven't lost much time," was Setley's greeting.

"Rather not," replied Alderhame.

"He was off like greased lightning, sir," added Ginger, "in case they
changed their blessed minds. I'm fair bustin' for a joy-ride in one
of them Tanks."

"You'll have your wish, then," said Ralph. "We are shifting to-night.
That airman you shot, Alderhame, tried to bomb us last night, and the
inference is that the Huns had been told of the locality of the Tanks
by a spy. So to avoid further risks we were going some four miles
away--somewhere between Givenchy and Souchez."

"That means business," said Alderhame. "We heard that our next thrust
is to be directed against Lens. My word! I can see us climbing Hill
70 in a Tank."

"Let's 'ope we don't drop down a bloomin' coal-pit," said Ginger.
"I've 'eard as 'ow some of 'em are 'arf a mile deep."

As soon as darkness set in the Tank Division, comprising twelve
landships and the travelling workshops and store lorries, proceeded
to its new destination, making a wide detour well behind the lines.
The new site had been carefully selected; piquets were posted to
prevent unauthorized persons approaching within four hundred yards
and every possible precaution taken to safeguard the mobile
fortresses.

"Quite a fine evening for a stroll," remarked Danvers, just as the
hour of midnight was approaching.

"Eh? What's the game?" enquired Ralph curiously.

His chum had recently returned from visiting the outlying posts. In
ordinary circumstances Danvers would be able to "stand off" until
five.

"Merely a whim of mine, I suppose," he replied. "At any rate, I'm
going, but, of course, if you----"

"I'm on," agreed Setley, buckling on his belt, to which was attached
his revolver-holster. "Where do you propose making for?"

"Along the Givenchy road," announced Danvers. "It's quite quiet. I've
a wish to explore a certain spot a little way off the high road.
Ready?"

The way was rough in spite of the urgent and ceaseless attentions of
the pioneers. Constant motor traffic had cut deep ruts into the soft
ground bordering the strip of _pavÃ©_. Of the avenue that formerly
fringed the road only a few trees were standing. Of the others
isolated shell-scarred stumps remained, but for the most part the
trees had been bodily uprooted by the titanic blows of bursting
explosives. Here and there a dead horse, its stiffened legs sticking
up in the air at various angles, showed up in the pale starlight. The
Huns had been shelling the wood during the day, and the transport had
paid toll. Shattered waggons and limbers, dragged to one side, also
bore silent testimony to the work of carnage.

"'Alt!" hissed a voice, and from the shadow of a tottering wall a
khaki-clad sentry appeared. The dully glinting tip of his bayonet
hovering within an inch or so of Setley's chest brought both officers
up with the utmost alacrity. They realized that it was unhealthy to
ignore a peremptory order of that description when on active service.

Danvers gave the countersign. The sentry, who belonged to the Tank
Section, recovered his rifle.

"All right, sir," he said. "You may pass."

"Everything correct?" enquired Danvers.

"Quite, sir," replied the man.

A quarter of a mile further on the two subalterns struck the main
road, along which a constant stream of troops and vehicles were
passing.

"Only a few yards of this," remarked Danvers. "We turn off to the
left again. See that building--or the remains of one?"

He indicated the gaunt gables of a farmhouse. The roof had entirely
disappeared. Not even a rafter remained. The front wall had been
blown out, leaving a far-flung mass of debris; the back wall was
still standing, although pierced through and through in a dozen
places.

"Carefully, now," whispered Danvers. "While I was visiting rounds I
spotted someone making for this house. Kept him under observation
with my night-glasses. I waited nearly twenty minutes and he didn't
show up again. That is in itself suspicious. I would have sent out a
piquet, only there was too much risk of the men giving themselves
away. It's a task best tackled by us, I imagine. You work round by
the right; I'll go to the left. If the fellow is still there, well
and good. We'll soon find out his business. If he isn't, we'll wait
and see if he returns."

The two officers separated. Keeping close to the ground and taking
advantage of a slight natural dip in the untilled field, Ralph
approached his objective. Presently he stopped and listened. He could
hear a voice either muttering or else expostulating in a sort of
jibberish unintelligible jumble.

"Not English, nor French--nor German," declared Setley. "Flemish
perhaps, but hardly likely. There's only one man, I should imagine;
but why does he carry on in this excited fashion?"

Drawing his revolver, Ralph continued his approach. Cover there was
now none. He had to cross twenty yards of open ground before he
gained the shadow of one of the gabled walls. In spite of his
caution, his boots squelched loudly in the tenacious mud. It seemed
impossible that anyone on the alert could help hearing him.

The muttering ceased. Ralph stopped dead. Had the mysterious
individual an inkling of danger? For a long-drawn half-minute Setley
waited, his feet sinking slowly and surely into the slime. Then the
flow of incoherent words was resumed.

Gaining the shelter of a wall, Setley paused. There were no signs of
Danvers. He decided to wait until his companion put in an appearance;
not that he was unable to tackle the suspect single-handed--there was
that predominating factor, his revolver. But, since he wished to take
the man alive, he resolved to leave nothing to chance and await
assistance.

Peering over the jagged edge of a hole in the brickwork Ralph saw the
object of his quest. On the mound of stones that at one time
comprised the farmhouse floor lay two scorched beams. On these a door
had been placed so as to form a rough table, and spread out upon this
was a coloured plan, illuminated by the shaded gleam of a military
map-reading lamp.

Bending over the plan was a tall, burly man, dressed in the uniform
of a British infantry officer. His face was in darkness, and whether
young or middle-aged Ralph was unable to determine.

On the floor by the side of the suspect lay a folded garment--a cloak
apparently--and a German army revolver; while to keep the edges of
the plan from being disturbed by the wind the man had made use of
four clips of cartridges as weights. By the brass material of the
clips Ralph knew that they were not British but German.

"Cool cheek," thought Setley. "Quite enough evidence to place him in
front of a firing party. He looks a tough customer, too." Presently
Danvers crawled up and also took stock of the suspect. The two
subalterns glanced at each other meaningly and nodded. Then, bounding
swiftly and agilely through the gap in the wall, they threw
themselves upon their quarry.

The improvised table flew one way; the spy, in the grip of his
assailants, the other. The plan coiled up and rolled across the rough
floor until it quivered against a projecting slab of stone. The lamp,
still alight, slipped to the ground, its rays directed skywards like
a miniature searchlight.

The fellow put up a tough fight. More than once he shook off his
attackers, but was unable to regain his feet and follow up the
advantage. He fought cleanly. He did not bite or kick--which was
remarkable for a Hun--but used his fists with good effect, as Danvers
had cause to know.

At length the two chums gained the mastery, although at the end of
the struggle they were almost played out.

"Now what's to be done?" gasped Ralph, when the suspect was securely
bound--wrists and ankles--by means of handkerchiefs and the man's own
revolver lanyard. "If we've got to bring him out of this we'll have
trouble. He's a lump of a chap."

"Get a man to mount guard over him until we can fetch the piquet,"
decided Danvers, wiping the perspiration from his forehead. "By Jove!
My nose feels as big as a turnip."

"It's certainly swelling some," remarked Setley, surveying his chum's
features by the aid of the captured electric lamp. "All right; you
stand by and I'll bring a Tommy back to look after the blighter."

In less than twenty minutes Ralph returned, accompanied by a corporal
of the Tank section whom he had met on the road.

"I've been trying to question the chap," reported Danvers. "Tried him
in German. Perhaps my rendering was so atrocious that he couldn't
understand, or else he's sullen. He tried to wriggle while you were
away, but he seems to be lashed up tight enough."

"Mount guard over him, corporal," ordered Ralph. "If he tries any of
his capers prod him in the stomach with your bayonet. I don't think
that would be bringing His Majesty's uniform into contempt. We'll
take that revolver and the map with us as evidence."

Leaving the corporal furtively eyeing his charge, like a terrier
watching a rat, the two subalterns hurried back to the camp.

Having made their report an armed piquet was sent out, together with
a couple of stretcher-bearers, in case the prisoner refused to walk.

"I feel rather 'bucked' over this business," remarked Danvers.
"Despite a bang on the proboscis, I am inclined to assert that this
night's work hasn't been thrown away. I was----"

A rifle-shot rang out, clearly audible above the rumble of distant
guns.

"By Jove!" ejaculated Ralph. "Corporal Rogers has plugged the chap."

"Rather a wide interpretation of your orders, old boy," replied
Danvers. "Why didn't he use cold steel?"

With the piquet hurrying at their heels the two officers ran across
the intervening stretch of mud and reached the ruins. The spy was
still there, very much alive. Over him stood the corporal. An empty
cartridge case on the floor and the reek of cordite fumes were silent
evidence to the identity of the man who fired the shot.

"All correct here, sir," reported Corporal Rogers. "I heard
footsteps, went to the broken window, and saw a bloke sneaking up
towards the building. I challenged, and he turned tail. Then I let
rip, and he dropped. I'll swear I plugged him, but he made no noise
when he fell."

Proceeding in the direction indicated by the corporal, Setley and
Danvers found the lifeless body of a man dressed as a French peasant.
There was nothing on him to prove his identity. Close by, and
evidently dropped as he fell, was a small bag of corn. A couple of
yards further away was found a little bottle containing water.

"Jolly fishy," declared Danvers. "Corn and water--too small to be of
much use for human consumption. What does it mean?"

Nothing more could be done as far as the slain peasant was concerned.
The officers returned to the ruins while the captive was being
strapped to the stretcher--a task that took the united efforts of
four of the piquet.

"This chap's a spy, that's a dead cert.," continued Danvers. "The
other fellow is an accomplice and brings him grub."

"But you said that the quantity was insufficient," protested Ralph.
"Your theory doesn't hold good."

"Hanged if it does," admitted Danvers, "It's a regular mystery. No
doubt----"

A gentle cooing above their heads caused the men to look up. Flashing
the light they discovered that nesting in a niche in the end wall was
a birdcage. It must have been placed there since the building was
partly demolished by shell-fire.

Standing on another man's shoulder one of the piquet handed down the
cage. Within were four carrier pigeons.

"The chain of evidence is complete," declared Danvers. "Bring those
birds along--and this one, too," he added, indicating the still
struggling prisoner.

"A very good night's work," commented the C.O., when the two
subalterns had made their report. "Two birds with one stone, by Jove!
All right, carry on; we'll have this gentleman tried by court-martial
in the morning."




CHAPTER XVIII

THE STRUGGLE FOR NEANCOURT VILLAGE


"THANK your lucky stars that you fellows aren't in Blighty," was the
greeting Setley and Danvers received on the following morning, when
they put in an appearance in the building pretentiously styled the
Mess.

"What's wrong now?" asked Danvers. "Rotten news in the papers?"

"We were referring to your escapade last night," continued the
speaker. "Your efforts are like the padre's egg: good in parts. We
don't deny that the fellow who was shot by the sentry was a spy, but
the other----"

"What about him?" enquired Ralph impatiently.

"Don't jump down my throat, old chap," was the feigned indignant
protest. "That's the secret of the whole business. You simply leap at
erroneous conclusions like a bull at a gate. Sometimes the gate goes,
sometimes it doesn't, and then the animal is sorry for itself. Do you
remember what Gladstone said in 'sixty-eight?"

"Nothing to do with this spy business, I'll swear," interrupted
Danvers, seizing his tormentor by the scruff of the neck. "Now, you
prevaricating blighter, out with it! What are you hinting at?"

"I was testing your knowledge of political history before
enlightening you----"

The young officer had no further opportunity in that direction, for
Setley gripped him by the heels and Danvers by the shoulders. Between
them they bumped their victim till he yelled for mercy.

"Then straight to the point," declared Danvers, "or we'll strafe you
again."

"I was recalling the Prime Minister's immortal quotation in the year
of grace eighteen hundred and sixty-eight," gurgled the captive,
whereat the bumping process proceeded, until the entry of the senior
major restored things to their normal state.

"Yes," he remarked, when Danvers had informed him of the reason for
the impromptu "rag." "You fellows have made a mess of part of the
business. The man in British uniform is a major of the Coalshires. He
is suffering from shell-shock, and is now under the doctor's care.
Memory gone, and all that sort of thing. Got out of touch with his
battalion and wandered into the ruined farmhouse for shelter. The
plan he apparently took from a German prisoner, and although in the
major's present mental state it conveys nothing to him it means a lot
of precious information to us. It appears to be an accurate and
official plan of the system of trenches surrounding the Von der Golz
Redoubt and the fortress village of NÃ©ancourt."

"That's good, sir," remarked Danvers.

"I agree, and so does the C.O. In any case, the plan will enable the
C.O. to communicate accurate information to the Brigade Headquarters,
in which event be prepared for the fall of the hitherto impregnable
Von der Golz Redoubt."

Outside Ralph encountered Sergeant Alderhame, who was busily engaged
in dismantling a machine-gun.

"You might have got me to chip in last night's affair, sir," he said
reproachfully.

"Couldn't be helped," replied Setley. "I would have done so, if
possible. How do you like your new job?"

"Absolutely top-hole," declared the ex-actor enthusiastically. "I am
just pining to have another slap at the Boches, this time inside one
of these beauties."

And he indicated the array of landships, now quiescent, like
Behemoths resting after a fray.

"You are getting quite vindictive," declared Ralph.

"I came out here with the idea that a German was a human being like
ourselves," said Alderhame. "I have altered my opinion since then.
Why, only this morning I met one of the Wheatshires back from out
there. The wanton damage those brutes did before evacuating some of
the villages shows that he is a beast. What puzzles me is that the
German Staff isn't afraid of the consequences. They must know they're
being beaten. I suppose it's a case of:


    "Before the curing of a strange disease,
    Even in the instant of repair and health,
    The fit is strongest; evils that take leave,
    On their departure most of all show evil."


"And I hope you're right," said Ralph. "There seems no doubt that the
Huns are getting properly whacked. It'll be a tough job for some
time, but they're on the down grade."

"To quote the bard again:


    He that stands upon a slippery place
    Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up.


You know, Mr. Setley, since I've been out here I firmly believe that
Will Shakespeare must have foreseen this business. How appropriate
many of his quotations are! However, quoting Shakespeare won't get
this blessed machine-gun re-assembled, so here goes.

Before the day was out persistent rumours passed from man to man that
the Great Push was to attain its culminating point--or, at least, a
terrific intensity--on the following Monday. The guns had allowed the
enemy no rest. On a front of twenty miles tons and tons of shells
were being pumped into the Hun lines. It was a bombardment that
presaged an infantry advance on a large scale, and that meant that
the Tanks were to play a conspicuous part.

On the evening prior to the longed-for day rumour gave place to
certainty. The advance was definitely fixed. Come storm or sunshine,
mud or dust, the khaki-clad infantry were to go over the top at the
hour of five-thirty. Every available Tank was to cooperate; once the
positions were won the Tank commanders were to exercise their
discretion in pushing on, keeping within the limits and following up
the British artillery barrage.

At the final conference, the officers of the Tank Division pored over
their maps and listened to elaborate but simply explained
instructions from the C.O. The principle objective during the first
phase of the advance was the Von der Golz Redoubt. The most
practicable means of approach was pointed out--a circuitous route
that first meant the occupation of the nest of fortified ruins that
at one time formed the village of NÃ©ancourt.

"Gain that, gentlemen," concluded the C.O., "and your _raison
d'Ãªtre_ is achieved. Afterwards you can rely upon your own
judgment."

Setley, like many others, sat up late that night. There was much to
be done on the eve of the battle. He had done it many times before,
but there was always the same sort of ritual to be undertaken in case
he "went West." The frequency with which he got his personal
belongings together, and wrote a farewell letter home, to be
forwarded in the event of anything happening, was becoming
monotonous. He dreaded the preliminaries, although he knew that the
moment the order for advance was received and the Tank set in motion
all fears on that score would be flung to the winds and absorbed by
the exhilaration of the battle.

The morning broke grey and misty. With the first signs of dawn the
infantry stood to arms, clustered as closely as the narrow width of
the trenches permitted. Overhead the British shells flew as thick as
hail, dropping with admirable precision upon the expanse of tortured
earth that recently had been the latest word in the system of German
field fortifications. NÃ©ancourt village remained fairly intact, as
far as observation from the British lines showed, while dominating it
was the strongly held Von der Golz Redoubt, formidable in spite of
the hammering it had received for the last forty-eight hours.

For good reasons, these two places had not been subjected to a
bombardment from H.E. shells. So long as they remained free from the
attentions of that sort of missile, the Germans kept their garrisons
up to full strength. They held the positions tenaciously, and
reckless of loss of life. Since every Hun put out of action meant an
irreparable loss to their reserves, it was better for the British to
leave a veritable death trap for their foes until the critical moment
of the advance than to pulverize the place and thus release German
troops for work in more extended positions.

"Those fellows will put up a stiff fight," remarked Danvers, as he
walked with Setley towards the waiting Tanks. "Prussian Guard and
Bavarian infantry: that's what we have in front of us. I hear that
the Saxons and Badeners have been withdrawn. They surrender too
freely to please old Hinder-beggar."

"Those blighters are obviously fed-up," agreed Ralph. "Sergeant
Alderhame showed me a card he had picked up in a captured dug-out. I
have it somewhere--yes, here it is."

He handed Danvers a piece of pasteboard, about four inches by three.
On it in German characters was the following:--

"Yield yourself prisoner: any one can who wishes to do so. Clear out
of your path those who lead you to the slaughter-house--they alone
are your enemies. Think of your dear ones. Do not sacrifice
yourselves for princes and the money bags of Prussia. Help yourselves
and God will help you.--Hans von Rippach."

"That shows the way the wind blows in the South German
principalities," commented Danvers. "Imagine our Tommies passing
round a thing like that. Hullo, there's the signal! S'long, old chap,
and the best of luck."

Five minutes later the array of Tanks ambled leisurely towards the
first-line trenches. Hardly a hostile shell came near them; the few
that did were "duds." Not only was the German fire diminished by the
British artillery, but the few missiles they did send over were
obviously deficient in quality.

Guided by the prearranged signals, the landships made for a part of
the British trenches that had already been cleared in order to allow
the mastodons to crawl over. As Ralph's Tank ground her way across
the deep and narrow trench the subaltern had a momentary glimpse of a
close line of steel-helmeted infantry, standing with one foot on the
fire-step and with their bayonets fixed, awaiting the shrill blast of
the whistles.

Fifty--a hundred yards ahead the Tanks went, greeted by a fierce yet
ineffectual fire from scores of machine-guns. Despite the heavy
bombardment, the Huns had again managed to keep a large proportion of
these deadly weapons intact. Against infantry their scythe-like hail
of bullets would be terribly effective. The Tanks, drawing the fire,
made it possible for the men to charge without excessive losses.

Straight towards NÃ©ancourt village the squadron of landships
advanced, but only to a certain point. Then, amid the yells of the
exasperated Prussians, who had been hoping that the mammoth
steel-clad machines would blunder into a series of pitfalls, the
Tanks turned abruptly to the right and parallel to the hostile lines.
Thanks to the plan that Danvers and Setley had taken from the
supposed spy, the landships were able to attack effectively and
without danger of being "bogged."

Within the confined space of the Tank the noise of the motors and
rapid bark of the quickfirers and the metallic rattle of the maxims
muffled all other sounds from without; yet Ralph caught the sudden
roar of the inimitable British cheer as the Tommies swarmed over the
top.

It was a case of concentrating all his attention on the enemy. Every
hostile machine-gun put out of action meant greater security to the
British infantry, and nobly Setley went about his task. Following the
Tank next ahead he kept within fifty yards of the enemy lines, the
nearest that the Tanks could approach without toppling over into
cunningly concealed pitfalls. As hard as the gunners could open and
snap to the metal breech-blocks, as rapidly as the maxims could use
up their belts of ammunition, the Tank, like her consorts, poured
shot and shell into every possible spot that might be a German
machine-gun emplacement.

The Huns stood their ground. The terror that had seized them when
first they had seen what they took to be supernatural monsters was no
longer manifest. They knew what Tanks were, what damage they could
do, and that, like other engines of war, they were vulnerable. The
fact that a long, deep, covered pit lay between them and the oncoming
landships gave them confidence--a confidence that was to be shattered
when they realized that somehow the British had learned the secret of
the hidden anti-Tank defences.

Again turning abruptly, this time to the left, the array of landships
lurched and sidled over the partly flattened-out trench, almost
simultaneously with the leading platoon of the charging infantry.

Although the foremost line was thinly held the Huns fought with a
desperate and ferocious courage. They were Prussians, steeped in the
belief that they are the finest troops in the world, and taught to
despise the amateur army that had, Phoenix-like, arisen from the
ashes of the "contemptible" little British expeditionary force that,
outgunned and outnumbered, ought to have been wiped out by the German
legions on the glorious retirement from Mons. Yet it had not. The
Prussian military machine had not reckoned upon one thing--the
dauntless bravery and stolid tenacity of the individual British
soldier.

With bomb, rifle and bayonet, the Huns sought to defend themselves
against the irresistible khaki-clad boys. Hardly once was the
recreant cry of "Kamerad" raised. In five minutes the British troops
were in indisputable possession of the first-line trenches. Here they
paused for a well-needed "breather," while the Tanks cleared a path
to the outskirts of NÃ©ancourt.

Three landships undertook this part of the operations. Others were
executing a "turning movement" against the Von der Golz Redoubt. Two
were already out of action--one receiving a direct hit from a 5-inch
shell, the other toppling over into a concealed pit.

Fierce as had been the struggle for the Hun front trench the fight
for NÃ©ancourt excelled it in savagery and tenacity. Setley soon had
evidences of the desperate courage of the Prussian Guard, for on
approaching the barricade at the outskirts of the village scores of
Germans boldly quitted shelter and attacked the Tank with bombs. It
was a futile, inane act, but characteristic of the temper of the
Boches. In a trice the roof of the Tank was swarming with men who
endeavoured to find a vulnerable joint in the massive armour. They
even rained blows on the muzzles of the quickfirers and tried to jam
the tractor-bands by means of crowbars and wedges, while in their mad
excitement many were killed and injured by bombs hurled by their
compatriots.

Ralph gave orders for the motors to be reversed. With the sudden
change of motion the Huns on the roof rolled off like ninepins. Many
were caught and crushed under the broad-flanged tractor-bands, others
formed an easy mark for machine-guns; while the Tank, shaking herself
clear, like a retriever emerging from the water, forged ahead again
for the barrier thrown across the street.

It was a formidable obstacle. Trees had been felled so that their
trunks--some of which were two feet in diameter--lay athwart the
road. Before and behind these were piled sand-bags, stopped with a
veritable forest of criss-crossed barbed wire. Between the
tree-trunks were two studded-linked steel chains, which had been
given plenty of "slack" so that they would "give," to a certain
extent, under the initial impact of the assailing Tank. Machine-guns
in plenty were behind the barricade; others were showing their snouts
through the glazeless windows of the houses, while nearly a thousand
picked German troops held the village.

With a dull thud the blunt nose of the Tank encountered the massive
obstruction. Ralph had avoided making for the centre of the
barricade, and had steered his command towards the right-hand side of
the road. The tree-trunks were levered aside under the irresistible
pressure of the ponderous mass of moving steel, sand-bags flew in all
directions, while the chains, pinned down under the tractor-bands,
failed utterly to justify the confidence that the Huns had placed
upon them.

Thousands of machine-gun bullets splayed upon the Tank's sides, bombs
burst all around her; yet scorning such trivialities the Tank bumped
over the debris of the demolished barricade, her guns spitting lead
with terrific effect upon the field-grey clad troops.

The first house in the street attracted Setley's attention. Save for
a few shell-holes in the walls and that it was roofless the building
was otherwise almost intact. From an upper window projected the
nozzle of a _Flammenwerfer_ apparatus. Although the weapon was not
brought into use against the Tank, Ralph guessed that it was being
kept inactive for a purpose. Should the British troops force an
entrance into the street, the diabolical contrivance would then be
brought to bear upon the dense crowd of khaki-clad Tommies.

Setley's command held on as if with the intention of traversing the
village street, until with a sharp turn it bore down upon the house
in which the liquid-fire party waited to do their barbarous work.

Striking the front wall obliquely the Tank smashed her way into the
building. Stones and bricks were flung asunder, beams began to crash
from the upper floors. The Huns, uttering yells of terror, either
tumbled headlong upon the roof of the Tank and thence rolled off and
were crushed between her sides and the tottering brickwork, or else
they clung desperately to the remaining walls and beams. The
liquid-fire apparatus fell with the men, the cylinder bursting and
discharging its contents all over the Tank and the surrounding
debris. Had any of the Boches seized the opportunity and applied a
light to the inflammable fluid it would have resulted in Ralph and
his men being roasted alive in their steel cage; but, fortunately for
them, the disaster did not take place.

It had been Ralph's intention to force his Tank completely through
the building, but this task was beyond the powers of the
motor-propelled fortress. Vainly the tractor-bands revolved, grinding
to powder the brick rubble, yet without gaining another inch.

Failing to forge ahead the Tank endeavoured to back out of the blind
alley in which she found herself. With the reversing of her motors
the landship jerked back a couple of feet or more and then sank
perpendicularly for a distance of seven or eight feet, so that its
roof projected only a couple of feet above the level of the street.

For a few seconds the sickening thud knocked the stuffing out of the
Tank's crew. Used to bumps and jars though they were they had never
before experienced the effect of falling with a hideous thud for a
vertical distance of nearly three yards. They were in total darkness,
for so dense were the clouds of dust and smoke that the daylight was
completely obscured.

When the dust had subsided sufficiently to allow the murky light to
penetrate, Ralph took stock of the position. Through the gap in the
outer wall that the Tank had made he could see a considerable extent
of the village street. Crowds of Germans were rushing up to reinforce
the men at the partly demolished barricade, from which Ralph
concluded that the British infantry had begun to make the attempt to
rush the village.

"If only we had a gun able to bear upon that mob, sir," exclaimed
Sergeant Alderhame, "we could enfilade the whole crowd."

It was a vain wish, for in falling the muzzles of the quickfirers had
been held up by the brickwork, with the result that they had been
wrenched from their mountings, while the mound of rubble was a few
inches too high to enable the maxims to be depressed sufficiently to
bear upon the Huns in the street.

None of the enemy paid any attention to the stranded Tank. Perhaps
the imminent danger of the attacking infantry exercised the prior
claim. At any rate, the crew of the landship were passive spectators
of the combat, unable to bring a gun to bear upon their foes yet in a
position to see most of what was taking place at the commencement of
the village street.

Despite machine-gun fire and an incessant fusillade of bombs the
storming party gained the gap in the barricade. Two companies of
different regiments were the first to get to grips with the enemy.
One was a Highland battalion, the other was comprised of men of
Ralph's old regiment--the redoubtable Wheatshires.

Both the Jocks and the Tommies were yelling furiously. Amid the babel
of voices could be heard the ominous shout of "No Quarter!" The men
were up against the Prussian Guard, and there were old scores to pay
off. Both the Wheatshires and the Highlanders had cause to remember a
certain incident earlier in the war, when under pressure of
overwhelming numbers the men had to give ground. Every wounded Briton
left on the field was mercilessly bombed or bayoneted, and the
perpetrators of this cruel and unnecessary act were Huns of the
Prussian Guard. No wonder, then, that it was now a case of _te
quoque_.

Magnificently the khaki-clad men came on. Numbers fell, but still the
forward movement was maintained. Up and over they swarmed. Bombs met
bombs, bayonet crossed bayonet, rifle-butts descended with sickening
thuds on heads. Men badly wounded grappled madly on the ground,
regardless of those who trampled on them, their one object being to
"do in" their immediate antagonists. Shells from German light field
guns were dropping into the pack of friend and foe, till the air
rained blood.

In the fury of the fight the combatants were scornful of the dangers.
To Ralph, temporarily a mere onlooker, the ghastliness of the whole
business was apparent. The hollow mockery of modern civilization
stood unmasked. Was it merely to satisfy the insensate craving for
glory on the part of that megalomaniac Emperor that millions of Huns
and their vassals poured out their blood like water, and more equal
numbers of Britons and their Allies freely risked their lives to
thwart the sanguinary ambitions of militant Prussianism?

The Kaiser had sown the wind and was now reaping the whirlwind.
Whether the present war would be the last, and the sword finally
beaten into a ploughshare, still remained to be proved. In calmer
moments would the Great Powers grasp the full significance of the
devastating and murderous effect of modern war, or is the primeval
instinct so deeply rooted in mankind that as long as the world exists
international disputes must be settled by the arbitrament of the
sword?

The sight of the frenzied mob of hale, active men, most of whom had
until a few months before been engaged in eminently peaceful
commercial and agricultural pursuits and had been almost entirely
ignorant of the use of the rifle, seemed to prove otherwise. Beneath
the veneer of civilization the fighting instinct, controlled by
centuries of law-governed authority, there still remained the
pugnacious instinct. And now, to quote a well-known critic, "the lid
of hell was off," with a vengeance.

For a futile ten minutes pandemonium reigned. Mingled with the rattle
of machine-guns, the sharp reports of rifle-shots, and the crash of
steel, were shouts of vengeful triumph and the cries of the wounded.
Through the eddying clouds of dust and smoke tiles and bricks from
the shelled houses flew in showers. Occasionally whole buildings
would collapse like a pack of cards, burying the German machine
gunners in the ruins. Fires, too, were breaking out to add to the
horrors of the scene, while with typical indifference the German
artillery were dropping shrapnel and gas-shells in the midst of the
pack of swaying and struggling combatants.

Beyond the barricade the advance came to a standstill. For a few
moments the tide swayed erratically, until the opposing troops were
hampered by the dead and wounded. Masses of Germans were hurriedly
rushed up through a gap in the otherwise faultless British artillery
barrage, and hurled themselves into the fray.

The situation looked critical until a brawny Highlander sprang upon
the captured barricade and, holding unsupported a ponderous Lewis
gun, pumped in a tray of ammunition over the heads of his comrades.
Then, with renewed shouts of "Scotland for Ever!" on the part of the
Jocks, and the dogged "Stick it, the Wheatshires!" the British swept
forward with an irresistible rush. The majority of the Prussians
threw down their arms and fled, to find their retreat cut off by
other British battalions, who, assisted by the Tanks, had completed
the turning movement. Some of the Huns dashed precipitately to their
underground retreats, with parties of British bombers hard at their
heels to rout them out of their deep dug-outs.

The fortress village of NÃ©ancourt had fallen, but it was a mere
incident in the vast field of operations in connection with the
Greater Push. Until the Von der Golz Redoubt was in British hands the
day's objective could not be considered as achieved.




CHAPTER XIX

THE MINED TUNNEL


A DOZEN wellnigh breathless Huns, with greasy uniform and battered
equipment, struggling to dive into the cellar in which Ralph's Tank
had become a "fixture," roused the crew to action.

The Germans, with their intimate local knowledge, expected to find a
safe retreat, until, to their consternation, they were confronted by
the blunt nose of the stranded landship and covered by two maxims
that could be brought to bear upon them although unable to be trained
over the pile of rubble that lay betwixt the Tank and the street.

"Hands up!" shouted Ralph.

The order was obeyed instantly.

"Ye vos Sachsen!" called out an imploring voice. "Mercy, Kamerad."

The statement was a false one, and Setley knew it.

"You are Prussians," he replied; "but we'll give you quarter. Keep
your hands up. The first man who lowers his arms will be shot."

Keeping close to the bows of the landship the crowd of now terrified
Huns obeyed the instructions. Throwing open the armoured door,
Corporal Anderson and two others of the crew emerged from the Tank
and deftly removed the prisoners side-arms and ammunition. This done,
they stood by to warn any parties of British bombers who in the heat
of the pursuit might hurl their devastating missiles into the cellar.

In the midst of his task Anderson spotted one man's hand stealthily
approaching his pocket.

"Wot 'ave you got there, old sport?" enquired the corporal, gripping
the Hun's wrist. "Search 'im, Smutty," he added, addressing one of
the Tommies.

The private did so, and discovered a small automatic pistol.

"So that's the bloomin' game, eh?" enquired Ginger. "Let 'im go,
Smutty. Now, look to yourself, Fritz. I'm a-goin' to dot you one."

The German evidently understood, and clenching his fists stood on his
guard. The next instant he was flat on his back, contemplating the
superb display of a galaxy of stars that danced before his
fast-closing eyes.

"What's up, Ginger?" asked Alderhame, and, glancing keenly at one of
the prisoners, suddenly lapsed into his unbreakable habit of quoting
the bard:


    "O world, thy slippery turns. Friends now fast sworn
    Unseparable, shall within this hour,
    On a dissension of a doit, break out
        To bitterest enmity."


To which the prisoner replied, in a faultless English accent:

"Alderhame! I little thought to see you here. Let me see: only three
years and six months ago we were on the boards together in _Much Ado
about Nothing_."

"And now," added Alderhame, "we're producing _Measure for Measure._"

"I hope it will be _All's Well that Ends Well,_" rejoined the German.
"I'm properly fed up with this war, and will be glad to be out of
it."

"You will be--in a prison camp in England," the sergeant assured him.
"We'll see that you are sent under escort to the rear. Unless your
own guns cop you there'll be nothing to fear. What made the crowd of
you make a dive for this cellar?"

"I don't mind telling you now," he said, in a low voice. "There's a
tunnel. That Tank has blocked up the entrance. It communicates with
our reserve lines, and the whole place is heavily mined. I would
advise you to clear out as soon as possible, for when our people have
waited sufficiently long to enable our troops to withdraw--the few
that are left, that is--the village will be blown to atoms."

Strong-nerved though he was, the ex-actor felt a cold shiver in the
neighbourhood of his spine. The possibility of being in close
proximity to a quantity of high explosive that would explode by the
act of touching a key--and more than likely a Hun was at that very
instant toying with the electric battery that would fire the
charge--was enough to make any man blench.

With an effort he pulled himself together.

"All right," he said, addressing his former brother actor and present
enemy. "I'll send you out under escort. Yes, the whole crowd of you,
I mean."

Obtaining Second-Lieutenant Setley's permission, Alderhame despatched
the prisoners under the charge of Corporal Anderson and two men. The
moment they had gone Alderhame imparted the grave news to his
superior officer.

"Send a man to warn the Divisional Officer of the troops holding the
village," ordered Ralph. "We'll have to abandon the Tank, I fancy."

At an order the crew hurriedly prepared to leave the shelter of the
stranded landship, but before they could do so a terrific concussion
shook the already tottering walls of the cellar, and an avalanche of
bricks from the upper part of the walls descended with a crash,
completely cutting off their retreat.

"Pleasant," remarked Ralph. "With a mine somewhere under you and H.E.
shells dropping overhead, and unable to get out of this hole, life is
a bit exciting. No, Alderhame; no more Shakespeare, please. We'll try
and find the tunnel to which your German acquaintance referred. By
the by, who is he?"

"He was in the same Repertoire Company with me," replied the
ex-actor. "It was in those dim and distant days before the war, yet I
remember how we parted."

He paused reflectively. Setley looked at him enquiringly.

"Well?" he asked tentatively.

"It was just before Treasury--that is, the weekly pay-day. He
borrowed a sovereign--maybe you recollect what that is, or was: a
circular flat disc of shining gold, for which one had to display a
certain amount of affection. He cleared out shortly afterwards, and I
haven't seen that Jimmy o' Goblin since--and don't expect to.
However, sir, he's done us a good turn warning us about the mine,
though it were to save his own skin."

In the intense gloom the crew of the Tank sought for the entrance of
the tunnel. Cautiously loosening brickwork and removing piles of
rubble they at length found the object of their quest--a long,
narrow, concreted passage that was originally intended for a
communication between the vast subterranean rooms under the village.

"Be careful, sir," cautioned Sergeant Alderhame, as Ralph flashed his
electric torch. "There might be some Huns lurking down here."

"Hardly," objected Setley. "It seemed to be common knowledge amongst
the Prussians that the place is mined. They'll keep clear. The
trouble is, I take it, to discover and disconnect the electric wires
before they spring the whole show."

The subaltern and his men hastened down the passage. If ever there
was a race against time this was. At eighty paces from the mouth
further progress was barred by a formidable barrier of sand-bags--the
"tamping" by which the main force of the explosion would be diverted
from what would otherwise be the easiest path--an horizontal
direction along the tunnel.

"We'll have to shift that lot," said Ralph encouragingly. "All hands
together, lads."

It was a tough task, for five yards' thickness of sand-bags had to be
removed before the mine chamber was reached. It was a nerve-racking
task when the huge store of explosive stood revealed in the glare of
an electric torch. At any moment the stuff might explode.

"It'll save the sanitary squad a job if it does," remarked one of the
men grimly, "Anyway, it's a mighty quick death--none of that rotten
hanging about."

Five minutes later more work resulted in the discovery of two
insulated wires that met in a metal box containing the primer. With a
sigh of relief Ralph severed the wires. Unless there were more sets
the immediate danger was over.

All this time the place was trembling under the concussion of heavy
shells overhead. Presently with remarkable suddenness the shelling
ceased.

"What does it mean, I wonder?" thought Ralph. "It can't be that our
fellows have been compelled to give ground. We must endeavour to get
out of this hole and see what's doing."

Bidding the men bring a small quantity of the explosive with them,
Setley retraced his way. During his absence more rubble had fallen,
and the roof of the Tank was covered with a tightly jammed mass of
broken bricks.

"Looks healthy, sir," commented Alderhame.

"Yes," agreed Ralph. "It seems as if we are to stop here until we are
dug out, unless we can contrive to blow away this mass of rubble.
Unfortunately, I am not expert in the art of the use of explosives."

"There's one of our fellows who used to be a quarryman," announced
the sergeant. "I'll get him."

In answer to his call, a little sharp-featured Welshman stepped
forward.

"Yes," he replied, in a shrill falsetto. "I have blasted stone for
the last three years. I do not know what strength this stuff has, but
we'll try."

Taking about seven pounds of the explosive the Welshman rammed it in
a cavity in the wall of rubble, filled in the mouth with sand-bags
brought from the mine gallery, and laid a fuse of cordite, obtained
by opening half a dozen cartridges.

"All ready, sir," he reported. "Get back all of you. I'll fire it.
It'll burn for thirty seconds, I guess, and that'll be enough for me
to hook it."

The rest of the crew entered the Tank, the door being left open for
the brave Welshman to gain shelter before the explosion.

Presently a match flickered in the gloom, followed by the sizzling of
the sticks of cordite, which burned with comparative slowness when
not under pressure.

With a furious bound the Welshman leapt into the Tank, his head
butting into the stomach of a comrade who was holding the door in
readiness to slam it the moment the man had gained shelter.

Even in the midst of danger the two began mutual recriminations, the
Welshman asking "what the silly idiot meant by getting in his way,"
the other retorting by requesting him in future to use his eyes to
see where he was going.

The argument ended with the terrific roar of the explosion, the sound
intensified in the confined space. Fragments of the brickwork rattled
on the Tank's armoured snout, clouds of acrid-smelling smoke wafted
into the crowded interior of the landship, but the object was
achieved.

Opening the door, Ralph saw sunlight filtering through the dust-laden
atmosphere. Making his way along the new exit, he cautiously
reconnoitred. The street was practically empty, save for the corpses
that littered the ground and a group of staff officers who had
evidently just emerged from taking cover.

"Confound you, sir!" roared a portly major-general. "What game do you
think you're playing? Do you know you nearly blew us sky-high?
Confound you, again!"

Setley waited until the irate officer had spoken his mind; then,
saluting, made a brief report of his discovery.

"There you are, Richards; I told you so," exclaimed the staff
officer, turning to one of his entourage. "The place is mined.
Suppose it's safe now?"

"I think so, sir," replied Ralph.

"It may come in handy against the Von der Golz Redoubt, in case our
men fail to secure a footing," observed the major addressed as
Richards.

"There's no failure about it," snapped the major-general. "Send an
orderly to the officer commanding the Royal Engineer detachment and
request him to take steps to remove the explosive from the mine
chamber. And what were you doing there?" he added, directing his
attention to Setley. Evidently an explanation at least was necessary
to justify the explosion that had all but settled a group of staff
officers.

"Tank, eh? What made you turn her into a cellar? Didn't know? Well,
you jolly well ought to. At a time when every available Tank is
required in front of the Von der Golz Redoubt you topple the bally
thing into a cellar."

Ralph was heartily glad to find himself dismissed from the presence
of the peppery staff officer. He felt considerably ill-used. Instead
of receiving a word of thanks for his resourcefulness in saving the
captured position from being blown to hits, he had been "rapped over
the knuckles."

"Here's a pioneer section just arrived, sir," reported Sergeant
Alderhame. "If you saw the company commander perhaps he would spare
enough men to help us dig a way out. It won't take much work, I
think. The rubble has been well sifted by the bursting charge."

The officer readily consented to assist in the salvage operations.
After all, the Tank had settled on the floor of the cellar, which was
about eight feet below the ground-level. Before she had come to a
standstill she had given forward for nearly five yards, and the whole
of this space was now filled in with bricks and mortar, forming a
fairly steep gradient.

Working strenuously for twenty minutes the fatigue party succeeded in
levelling the slope sufficiently to enable the Tank to back.
Fortunately, the motors and tractor-bands were intact. The mounting
of one of the quickfirers was damaged beyond repair, the other was
put in order by the crew.

Amidst the cheers of the men the Tank climbed, stern-foremost, out of
her place of imprisonment and gained the shell-pitted street.

An orderly, doubling towards the British lines, stopped by the side
of the freed machine.

"Can you push forward, sir?" he asked. "The infantry are being held
up. There are only five Tanks left in action."




CHAPTER XX

THE FALL OF THE VON DER GOLZ REDOUBT


ON clearing the other end of the captured village of NÃ©ancourt Ralph
was able to form a fairly comprehensive idea of the present state of
operations.

The Von der Golz Redoubt, one of the strongest positions in the
boasted Wotan Line, was still held by the Huns. The British guns were
thundering furiously against it. The marvel was that the men could
stand such a gruelling, but the Huns did, keeping to the shelter of
their deep dug-outs and manning the defences the moment the guns
"lifted." Hundreds of Prussians must at that moment be entombed in
those dug-outs, of which the entrances had caved in under the
terrific power of the H.E. shells, yet hundreds more were available
to hold the redoubt "at all costs."

During the lull between the cessation of the bombardment and the
numerous but hitherto fruitless infantry assaults British airmen had
flown over the redoubt, bombing the defences and even employing
machine-gun fire against the tenacious grey-coats. The airmen were in
turn attacked by Hun machines, and during the progress of the
fighting on land combats in the "vasty air" were taking place
unheeded by the grimly contesting troops in and around the Von der
Golz Redoubt.

Deftly picking her way betwixt the scores--nay, hundreds--of bodies
of dead and wounded that littered the ground, Setley's Tank
approached the closely grouped Tommies who, hugging the earth to
avoid the ubiquitous machine-guns, were awaiting the order to
advance.

Of the other Tanks the tops of three could be discerned showing above
a rise in the terrain. Two more had just advanced against the
formidable defences, and both had failed gloriously.

"The guns are lifting, sir," reported Sergeant Alderhame.

"Good business!" muttered Ralph. "I'm fed up with this inaction.
Another ten minutes will decide whether we are booked or not."

Crunching her way over the shallow trenches held by the British
stormers, the Tank floundered through the vast shell-craters that up
to a few minutes before had been torn up by the British guns. Quite
recently there had been a system of trenches there--those deep,
concrete-reinforced, scientifically constructed ones that had taken
the Huns months to perfect. Every trace of their earthworks had been
obliterated.

Beyond lay a triple line of barbed wire. By one of those freakish
circumstances the entanglements had escaped the devastating hail of
shells. A few posts had been shattered, some strands of wire cut
through, but, generally, this defence work was as efficacious as
ever, as the crowd of bodies in khaki and field-grey that were "hung
up" on the tenacious barbs testified.

A bomb dropped from a hostile machine fell within ten yards of the
Tank. In spite of her bulk and weight, the huge fabric trembled under
the concussion.

"Beastly mean trick!" thought Ralph. "That Hun airman knows that we
cannot see him, and that we don't carry antis. Wonder what our fliers
are doing to let him amuse himself in this manner?"

With a sickening crash a biplane came to earth, right in the path of
the moving Tank. A glance at the twisted wreckage showed that the
infamous Black Cross was painted on the planes. Ralph had a smart
answer to his question. Our airmen had been busy up aloft.

Setley did not trouble to turn aside his command. Right over the
debris of the German biplane she waddled, crushing metal and wood
into an unrecognizable pulp, and then thrust her blunt nose into the
outer line of barbed wire.

Like a rhinoceros tearing up jungle grass with its formidable horns
the Tank set about to destroy the entanglements. Posts snapped off
like carrots, coils of wire suddenly released from tension quivered
in the air until borne down and buried deep in the earth by the broad
traction bands of the landship. The while machine-gun bullets rattled
harmlessly against her armoured hide, bombs exploded on, against, and
underneath the terrible war-machine. The car of Juggernaut would cut
a very poor show compared with this motor-propelled fortress.

Other Tanks were engaged in similar operations, keeping parallel to
the line of direction of the hostile trenches and methodically
uprooting the entanglements in as many minutes as it had taken the
Germans days to set up in position. Having completed this part of the
programme the Tanks made for the sand-bagged parapet at the raised
end of the glacis, while simultaneously with this movement the
whistles went, and the British infantry rushed forward with an
irresistible _Ã©lan_.

Their attention divided between the terrifying landships, that were
crunching over emplacements and trenches, and the glittering array of
bayonets, the German machine-gunners, unfortunately for them, did not
take into account a couple of British biplanes, Cleaving through the
dense eddying clouds of smoke and recklessly disregarding the
bursting shells the intrepid airmen descended to within a hundred
feet of the Von der Golz Redoubt and the adjacent trenches. A hail of
bullets from the airmen's Lewis guns--death-dealing hornets--caught
the Huns unawares, creating havoc in the dense masses of grey-coated
infantry.

Poison gas shells added to the horror of the desperate struggle.
Aerial torpedoes, missiles from trench mortars, and the deadly shells
from the Stokes' guns, rained upon the enemy position. It was a
wonder that the Huns stood it as they did; yet, with their back to
the wall and unable to retreat or even to take shelter in their deep
dug-outs, they fought with a courage that could only be described as
fanatical.

Ploughing her way through the mazes of barbed wire Setley's Tank came
astride a deep trench that flanked one side of the redoubt to where
the glacis terminated in what was a few hours before an elaborately
constructed covered way bristling with loopholes, each one of which
showed the muzzle of a machine-gun. Now there was little left but a
crumbling mound of earth and disrupted sand-bags, in which
half-buried Germans still maintained a furious but erratic
rifle-fire.

Almost before he was aware of it Ralph found himself within the once
considered impregnable redoubt. There was practically nothing to mark
its position. It was only when he found himself confronted by a
landship strongly resembling his own that he realized that he had
gained his objective, for the oncoming Tank was not, as he at first
imagined, one of German workmanship, but a British machine that had
entered the redoubt on the opposite side.

Narrower and narrower grew the encircling ring of khaki. With bomb
and bayonet the British infantry swept the flattened earthwork, until
the surviving Huns, finding further resistance useless, threw down
their arms and raised shouts of "Kamerad." Greatly to their surprise
they found that, contrary to the statements of their officers, the
British Tommy is a generous victor. As if by magic the heat of combat
gave place to a light-hearted, almost considerate, treatment of the
remnant of the garrison of the redoubt, and it was by no means an
uncommon sight to see a British soldier bind up the wounds he had
inflicted on a German only a few minutes previously.

The paucity of prisoners testified to the stubbornness of the enemy
resistance. Quickly the captives were formed up and marched to the
advance cages--a task not without great peril, since the German
gunners, according to their customary indifference to their ill-fated
comrades, were putting up a barrage behind the captured position.

With the clearing of the remnants of the garrison the victorious
Tommies began to put the shell-tortured ground into a state of
defence. They were now well astride the vaunted Hindenburg Line, and
it was pretty certain that the Huns would make a strong and
determined counter-attack in order to attempt to wrest the position
from the victors. The attack would be soon--before the British heavy
guns could be moved forward, and already the railway corps were
placing sections of rails in position to enable the twelve- and
fourteen-inch monsters to be sent forward. Once they were in position
the Von der Golz was lost for good and all to the Huns, and they knew
it.

There was no rest for the Tanks that had escaped being placed _hors
de combat_. Orders were given for the landships to push ahead and
hold the counter-attacking force in check.

"Independent action, you know," remarked the commanding officer of
the Landship Section. "So out you go, and the very best of luck."

Ralph knew what that meant. It was one of the most hazardous
enterprises that a Tank could be called upon to perform. With a
quickening of his pulses he gave the word for the motors to be
started once more and steered his armoured mobile fortress in the
direction of the unknown territory that for the last two years or
more had been firmly held by the Huns.

"By Jove! Alderhame," he exclaimed, "we're on a big thing this time.
Wouldn't miss it for worlds."

"Let's hope we won't," added Sergeant Alderhame grimly. "The present
world is quite good enough for me for a long time to come, Boches
notwithstanding."




CHAPTER XXI

TRAPPED


"'OLD 'ard, chapses; 'old 'ard!"

"What's that?" enquired Ralph, hearing a voice but unable to
distinguish the words owing to the din both within and without.

"It's Corporal Anderson, sir," reported one of the crew.

Setley gave orders for the door to be opened. With the Tank still in
motion, George Anderson clambered into the interior and gave vent to
an exclamation of profound relief.

"Thoughter wasn't goin' to pick you up, sir," he remarked. "I got
them Boches back all right, and then blow me if I could find you
anywheres. If I've chased one bloomin' Tank I've chased a dozen, to
say nothin' of a few cripples, although I didn't think as 'ow
anythink could 'appen to this 'ere gadget."

The corporal was too modest to relate the peculiar adventures he had
undergone in his finally successful quest; how he had twice been
knocked flat by exploding shells, and how he had alighted upon a
"pocket" of armed Germans who had been overlooked in the forward
movement. With his utmost coolness Ginger had beckoned to a totally
imaginary crowd of Tommies, and at the same time had shouted to the
Huns to "'Ands up," with the result that more time was taken up in
the return journey to the advance cages, shepherding eleven Guardsmen
in front of him.

"Have you seen anything of Mr. Danvers?" enquired Ralph.

"Yes, sir," replied Ginger. "It was 'im wot told me where you was.
'Is Tank was just off along the Hoppy Road, goin' like a young
racehorse."

It was in the direction of the fortified village of Oppy that Ralph
was making. At this point the massing of German infantry had been
reported by aerial scouts. By road and rail reserves had been rushed
up from other sections of the Hindenburg Line. The Tanks were to cut
the enemy's communications, if possible, and hinder the concentration
of Germans for the counter-attack.

The shell-pitted ground over which Setley's Tank nosed her way was no
longer under fire. The enormous craters had been torn up by the
bombardment of the British heavies. The guns were now being pushed
forward, and although the German artillery was still putting up a
strong barrage the projectiles were falling between the captured Von
der Golz Redoubt and NÃ©ancourt village.

Every foot of the way was strewn with evidences of the devastating
effect of the pounding of the shells. Numerous corpses, half-buried
limbers, dismounted field-guns, and a medley of shattered transport
waggons testified to the terrible gruelling the Huns had received
behind their trenches. Here and there were heaps of brickwork mingled
with still smouldering woodwork--all that was left of a dozen
villages. Hardly a tree was left standing. The few that were had been
stripped of branches and reared their scorched and seared trunks like
grim gallows trees silhouetted against the black and yellow waste of
smoke.

Already British cavalry were patrolling considerably beyond the
ground held by the infantry. The men, filled with wild enthusiasm at
being able to be in the saddle and after their foes, were making
short work of all small detachments of Germans who had got out of
touch with the main body.

For three miles Setley's Tank pursued her way before losing sight of
the cavalry. Occasionally a Hun sniper would send a bullet pinging
harmlessly against her steel sides, but the crew loftily ignored the
useless compliment. With bigger game in view, the individual German
marksman could be simply left alone.

As the Tank approached a ruined wall a khaki-clad figure appeared as
from the earth and began running towards the oncoming machine, waving
his hands in a manner that clearly indicated his wish for the
landship to stop.

"He's an officer, sir," reported Sergeant Alderhame. "Wonder what
he's doing so far ahead? Prisoner, perhaps, who has managed to give
the Huns the slip."

Giving orders for the motors to be switched off, Ralph brought the
Tank to a dead stop, and unbolting the armoured door awaited the
officer's approach. Caution urged him not to throw the door wide
open, in case there were snipers about, but without drawing the fire
of a single rifle the stranger gained the Tank and at Ralph's
invitation nimbly hopped in.

"Glad to have fallen in with you," was the new-comer's greeting. He
was a tall sparely built man in the uniform of a captain of the Royal
Flying Corps. "My name is Cludderborough. I suppose I have already
been reported as missing. I was brought down a week ago last Friday.
Nearly came a good old crash, but got off lightly, with the exception
of a sprained ankle. I managed to escape during the bending of the
Hindenburg Line. That was early this morning. So far I've not done so
badly, but my ankle is giving me a lot of pain. So that is why I
signalled for you to stop."

"But we aren't going your way," remarked Ralph. "We're off on a sort
of independent cruise, don't you know. I would suggest that you enjoy
the hospitality of the nearest shell-hole until our cavalry patrols
come up. They are not so very far behind."

Captain Cludderborough did not hail the proposition with enthusiasm.
In fact, he promptly "turned it down."

"Too jolly risky," he observed. "Already snipers have put shots
through my coat. You have no objection to taking me as a passenger, I
hope? I may come in pretty useful, since I know the country behind
the German line very well, both from the standpoint of an aerial
observer and from that of an escaped prisoner."

Ralph did not immediately accept the offer. There was no good reason
why he should not do so. Rapidly weighing up the situation, he
decided that no great harm could be done in the giving the Flying
Corps officer a "lift."

"I must warn you," he said, "that we are about to engage in a
particularly hazardous enterprise. If you are anxious to rejoin your
Corps as quickly as possible I should advise you to accept my
proposition. If, on the other hand, you think you can materially
assist us then by all means come along."

"Right," rejoined the captain promptly. "You are about to cut the
Germans' lines of communication in the neighbourhood of Oppy? There's
a beautiful temporary trestle-bridge which the Huns have recently
made to take the place of a steel viaduct brought down by one of our
airmen. This Tank ought to crumple the structure as easily as if it
were a pack of cards. By the by, have you a snack of something to
offer me? I am absolutely ravenous."

"Get Captain Cludderborough something to eat, Corporal Anderson,"
said Ralph. "You'll have to excuse our lack of courtesy," he added.
"The limited space, the jolting motion, and above all the fact that
we are in an hostile country, prevents me from doing the honours
properly."

"Where's your map?" asked the captain, after he had finished his
meal. "Ah, there you are: no sign of the viaduct is shown. The
thing's beastly inaccurate. See that slight river almost ahead?
That's NÃ´tre Dame d'Huy. The railway line skirts the other side of
the hill. There's a fairly broad valley between NÃ´tre Dame and the
hill on the right. Both eminences are crossed with trenches, but they
are not held. The Huns were clearing out as I slipped through. It's
my belief that they have purposely retired in order to leave a
tempting gap for our troops, and then they'll start shelling from
both sides. However, it's too early for that, so we ought to get
through and astride the railway line before they spot us."

Captain Cludderborough spoke with such decision that his words
carried conviction. With his aid there was certainly a good chance of
pulling off a highly successful coup. By destroying the railway
bridge the transference of German troops from the southern sectors of
the line to the threatened regions would be seriously impeded. By the
time the men were taken by a circuitous loop-line the British heavy
guns would be in position ready to meet the expected counter-attack
upon the village of NÃ©ancourt and the captured Von der Golz Redoubt.

Steadily the Tank approached the gap between the two hills. So far
all went well. Captain Cludderborough's statement that the Germans
had abandoned the rising ground was evidently confirmed, for there
were no signs of any living Huns.

"Rummy sort of show, sir," commented Sergeant Alderhame, as the
defence came in sight. "I should feel inclined to go smack bang over
the hill instead of through that gap."

"Eh?" interrupted the captain. "You would, would you? Not only would
you have to surmount difficult ground, but you would be absolutely on
the sky-line and a target for every German quickfirer within ten
thousand yards."

"Very good, sir," said the sergeant quietly. Having made his protest,
he had done all he could in that direction. He was bound to obey
unquestionably the decision of his superior officer, and since Setley
agreed to the captain's remark the matter was settled.

Nevertheless, Sergeant Alderhame's words impressed themselves upon
Ralph's mind The subaltern decided that he would be unfeignedly glad
when the Tank emerged from that forbidding valley. The very
stillness, contrasting vividly with the rumble of the distant guns,
seemed out of place.

The defile was nearly three quarters of a mile in length, its width
averaging only a hundred yards. On either side the ground rose with
tolerable abruptness, the height of the encircling hills being
considerably greater than it had appeared when viewed from a
distance. Half-way to the summit a triple line of trenches
encompassed both hills, but these were as silent as the tents of
Sennacherib when the angel of death had passed through the Assyrian
hosts.

"Nearly through," remarked Captain Cludderborough, who had taken his
stand at Ralph's elbow. "You'll see the precious trestle-bridge in
half a shake."

As he spoke there was a loud roar. A dense cloud of smoke and dust
leapt skywards at the distance of a furlong in front of the Tank.
Almost simultaneously another explosion occurred at a similar
distance to the rear. The Huns had sprung two land mines. The Tank,
caught betwixt them, was trapped, and to impress the fact more
strongly upon her hundreds of Germans appeared from the hitherto
apparently deserted trenches.

The cold muzzle of an automatic pistol was pressed against Ralph's
temple and the mocking voice of the pseudo Captain Cludderborough
remarked:

"You will do well, sir, to order your men to surrender instantly.
There is no escape. Give in without resistance and you will be
accorded honourable treatment. I, Kapitan Karl von Hoerfelich,
guarantee it."

Von Hoerfelich was a resourceful German who, attracted by the offer
of a large monetary reward for the capture of an intact British Tank,
and animated by a strong desire to further the interest of the
Imperial arms, had employed a daring ruse in order to attempt to
achieve his object. Speaking English with the utmost fluency and
having a thorough knowledge of British military matters--a knowledge
gained by a seven years' exile in Great Britain, during which time he
had taken up a menial position as a waiter at a famous Army Club--he
submitted his plan to his superiors.

In brief, he was to personate a British airman who had made a forced
landing behind the German lines. The chance of meeting with a Tank
operating far in advance of the infantry was realized, and so far he
had successfully lured the landship into a formidable ambush. The
moment had come for him boldly to proclaim his identity, his firm
belief being that seeing the uselessness of resistance, the crew
would tamely surrender at his summons.

Completely taken aback when he felt the muzzle of the pistol against
his temple, Second-Lieutenant Setley wisely refrained from obeying
his natural inclination of grappling with his declared enemy.

"Wouldn't it be advisable to stop the motors?" asked Ralph coolly.
"We'll come an awful crash in that beastly hole ahead if we don't. It
looks quite fifty feet deep, doesn't it?"

Deceived by the apparent simplicity and urgency of the question, von
Hoerfelich gave a brief glance through the slit in the armour in
order to verify Setley's statement.

Quick as was his action, Ralph was quicker. With a sharp upward
movement of his elbow he jerked the German's automatic pistol. At the
same time he ducked his head and gripped the Hun round the waist.
Interlocked in a grim embrace, the two men struggled in the confined
space while the Tank ambled uncontrolled towards the yawning
mine-crater.

Something hard grazed Ralph's cheek and struck the German on the
point of his chin with a dull hideous thud. With a muttered "Wot's
yer game, old sport?" Ginger Anderson had planted a terrific
left-hander on a vulnerable part of the Boche's anatomy. The fellow's
resistance collapsed, and he dropped inertly at the little corporal's
feet.

Recovering his disturbed senses, Ralph shouted to the men to open
fire; then turning the Tank in as small a curve as possible he
steered the monster up the steep side of the ravine, where hundreds
of the enemy, assisted by the natural defence of the ground, awaited
with complete confidence the capture of the trapped Tank.




CHAPTER XXII

TANK VERSUS LOCOMOTIVE


THE tactics of the landship that, according to their belief, was as
good as captured, puzzled the Germans considerably. They waited,
expecting to be hailed by the Prussian captain, whom they knew was
inside the Tank.

The Huns were quickly undeceived. A withering fire from the Tank's
machine-guns catching them unawares played havoc with the soldiers
who had rashly left their shelter trenches. At the same time, the
landship, heeling over until she appeared to be on the point of
capsizing, lumbered bravely up the steeply shelving side of the
valley.

The ground, though rocky and irregular, afforded a good grip to the
tractor-bands. Small and medium sized boulders she crushed into the
softer soil, the larger ones she pushed aside. Brushwood and saplings
were rent, the few stunted pine trees in her course were simply
uprooted.

"By Jove!" ejaculated Setley delightedly. "She's doing it. I was
rather doubtful whether she would tackle that gradient. Now, you
bounders, how's that?"

The Tank was astride the first trench--a deep and narrow excavation,
but, unlike those on flat ground, following the contour of the
hillside in a fairly straight line. With her nose resting on the
parados and her tractor-bands scooping up sand-bags like a dog
scratching at the mouth of a rabbit-hole the landship remained
practically stationary for nearly a minute, the maxims each letting
loose the best part of a belt of ammunition.

Fortunately there were no field-guns in this section. The Huns,
recovering from their surprise, were, however, letting fly with
machine-guns, rifles and bombs, all of which had no appreciable
effect upon the armoured mastodon.

The Tank was nearly the cause of her own destruction by remaining
astride the trench, for some of the maxim bullets striking a can of
detonating powder that had been left over from the amount required to
charge the landmines went off with a roar that completely dominated
the rattle of musketry.

In spite of her weight and bulk the landship reeled under the
terrific blast. Huge rocks were hurled against her sides. When the
smoke had cleared away Ralph could form a hasty idea of the nature of
the damage. Where the trench had been was a huge semi-crater nearly
fifty yards in length. A large portion of the hillside had been blown
away, forming an almost perpendicular semicircular cliff. The
corresponding half of the circle of displaced earth had crashed into
the valley--a vast jumble of rocks, stones, earth and sand-bags,
mingled with the corpses of a hundred Germans. And within her own
length of the newly formed precipice the Tank rocked on the unstable
soil. It was touch-and-go whether she would slither, like a
side-slipping motor-car, into the abyss.

Once more mechanical ingenuity triumphed over the forces of nature.
Resisting the attraction of gravity and overcoming the tendency to
slip on the crumbling, moving soil, the Tank drew steadily away from
the danger zone, until gaining firm ground she resumed her upward
climb and approached the second line of trenches.

Not a shot came from this part of the defences. The Huns, bewildered
and demoralized by the nerve-racking catastrophe and the sight of
their comrades being hurled like stones from a catapult, had fled.
Even their officers made no effort to keep them back. Not knowing the
cause of the explosion they had formed the erroneous idea that the
British landship possessed some terrific and hitherto unknown means
of destruction and had used it with annihilating results upon the men
in the first trench.

"We're through," ejaculated Alderhame. "'Ware the summit, sir; that
skunk of a Hun evidently spoke the truth for once in his life when he
said we would be shelled if we showed up on the skyline."

"I will," replied Ralph. "I had forgotten. Suppose it was in the
excitement of the minute. Any casualties?"

"Private Saunderson has got a gash over the left eye, sir," reported
the sergeant. "A splinter of steel must have come in through the
sighting aperture. It's not at all a serious wound."

Skirting the rounded top of the hill of NÃ´tre Dame Ralph brought his
command in sight of the undulating country beyond, an expanse of
fertile land dotted with numerous valleys, all of which were fated to
be destroyed by the retreating enemy within the next few days. Right
in the foreground was the railway line, the viaduct being less than
half a mile from the moving Tank. Detached parties of Germans and
isolated individuals were hurrying away from the approaching British
troops, who were now at least three miles off.

In the distance a column of white vapour stood out clearly against
the clouds of black and brown smoke and announced the fact that a
train was on the move, making in a north-westerly direction. It was
one of many bringing up the German reserves to launch their
formidable counter-attack upon the men who had broken Hindenburg's
line.

"Whack her up for all she's worth," ordered Ralph, addressing the
motor mechanic. "Now, lads, it's a race. It's up to us to get to that
viaduct before the train can cross."

The bridge, although not marked on Ralph's military map, was in the
position indicated by the impersonator of Captain Cludderborough. It
crossed a small stream at a point one hundred yards or thereabouts to
the north of the original structure that had been bombed and
demolished by British airmen. The temporary viaduct was made of huge
baulks of timber supporting a central span of only thirty feet. The
banks of the stream that flowed underneath were low, the ground
sloping gently on the near side but rising with considerable
abruptness on the remote side.

With a succession of jolts and bumps the Tank plunged downhill at a
greater rate than she had ever done before in her brief yet
strenuously exciting career; but notwithstanding the hot pace Setley
was forced to come to the conclusion that the troop train would be
the first to reach the bridge.

He thought hard. The time for decisive action, bordering on
self-sacrifice, was at hand. Unable to destroy the bridge before the
train rumbled across he decided to try conclusions with the
locomotive.

"Pass the word that any man who wishes may get out," he said to
Sergeant Alderhame. "I'm going to ram that engine."

Alderhame bellowed out his superior officer's permission. It would be
a comparatively easy matter for the men to alight from the moving
Tank, but one and all elected to take their chances with their
youthful officer.

Gripping the nearest object that formed a likely hold the men awaited
with grim faces and tightly closed lips the impact with an equal
target of metal moving at five or six times the rate of the landship.

The driver of the locomotive had spotted the Tank. To Ralph's
satisfaction he saw that the German was applying his brakes and
shutting off steam. Had he maintained his speed there was a chance
that he might have escaped a collision. By easing down he not only
played into the hands of his enemy but mitigated the chance of the
Tank's destruction.

Had there been time Ralph would have merely steered his Tank across
the lines, in which case the weight of the landship would have
twisted the track and caused the train to leave the metals. But there
was not. To attempt to do so would result in the engine striking the
Tank fairly on her side.

Meeting at an aggregate rate of nearly thirty miles an hour the
Tank's nose struck the locomotive a glancing blow somewhere in the
region of the driver's cab. With a terrific rending of metal and the
hiss of escaping steam the engine toppled over on its side, while the
carriages either telescoped or lurched over the slight embankment.

As for the Tank, she began to climb upon the wreckage of the
vanquished; then turning began to describe a small circle.

It was some minutes before the bruised and shaken crew could realize
what had occurred. The tractor-bands on the right-hand side had been
shattered by the impact, the left-hand one was intact and still
moving. Like a bird wounded in one wing the landship was unable to
keep a straight course and could only crawl round and round almost on
her own axis.

Although crippled the Tank still retained certain of her powers of
offence. Her maxims were trained upon the swarm of dazed and shaken
Huns who were emerging from the wrecked carriages. There was no need
to open fire. The Germans had a wholesome dread of British landships,
a fear based solely upon hearsay since none of these had previously
seen a Tank. With upraised hands and cries of "Mercy, Kamerad!" the
majority now approached the now motionless landship. The remaining
survivors of the collision were either hiding behind the overturned
carriages or else scurrying across the fields, in order to put a safe
distance between them and the frightful engine of warfare.

"What's to be done with this crush?" enquired Ralph. "We can't fire
on the blighters, we can't take them prisoners."

"And if we let them go they'll soon tell their pals, sir," added
Alderhame. "The best thing, I take it, is to hold them under the
cover of our guns and await events. Our cavalry patrols may be here
shortly."

Setley shook his head.

"Won't do," he objected. "More than likely the limits of to-day's
gains are already fixed, in which case we may have to wait until next
week. I'll order the Boches to clear out. It will leave us free for
another task; after that we must take our chances."

The Huns obeyed Ralph's peremptory order with evident hesitation Some
of them, perhaps, wanted to be taken prisoners. Fresh from the
Russian front they dreaded the horrors of the Ypres salient and the
regions of the Somme and Ancre. Others were under the impression that
the order to clear out was merely a ruse on the part of the Tank and
that directly they were at a certain distance from the latter they
would be shot down by her machine-guns.

"Now," declared Ralph, as the handful of Britons were left alone with
the dead and dying victims of the deliberate collision. "A couple of
men, with a charge of explosive and a two-minute fuse: we're going to
settle the bridge."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE LAST STAND


REFUSING Sergeant Alderhame's offer to accompany him and leaving him
in charge, Ralph, with Corporal Anderson and a private, emerged from
the Tank.

There was no time to be lost. Already Setley had caught sight of a
battery of German fixed field guns moving somewhat in the direction
of the crippled Tank. Even if the survivors of the troop train did
not inform the artillery officers of the presence of the British
landship there was not the faintest chance of the huge,
multi-coloured target escaping the notice of the gunners.

Bearing the explosive the subaltern and the two men raced to the
bridge. Waist deep in water Ginger Anderson placed the charge in a
space between the baulks of timber forming one of the principal
piers, applied and lit the fuse.

The three started to run back to the shelter of the Tank when the
sharp crack of a rifle rang out and Corporal Anderson pitched
headlong on his face and rolled over on his back.

"'Ard lines," he gasped. "Properly plugged, an' no chance of gettin'
back to Blighty. 'Op it, sir, an' don't worry arter me."

Ralph knelt by the side of his wounded corporal and one-time
fellow-private. The other man also stopped and threw himself upon the
ground. The time-limit of the fuse was nearly up.

"Where are you hit?" asked Setley.

"Left leg, sir," replied Ginger Anderson.

"No more bloomin' football for me, worse luck. It's like this,
sir----"

A deafening crash denoted the fact that the charge had exploded. When
the dust cleared away the greater portion of the bridge was no longer
in existence. That part of the business had been successfully
accomplished.

"Put your hands round my neck and hang on," ordered Setley. "I'm
going to carry you in."

With the assistance of the private Anderson was hoisted on the
subaltern's back and the last stage of the return journey began, but
before Ralph had taken a dozen steps something like a hot-iron seared
his shoulder. In spite of the weight of his burden he turned round
twice and then collapsed, losing consciousness to the rattle of one
of the Tank's machine-guns.

At the report of the rifle-shot that had brought Ginger Anderson down
Sergeant Alderhame, keenly on the alert, kept a sharp look-out for
the sniper's position. When the second report rang out the sergeant
let rip with the machine-gun, with the result that he had the
satisfaction of seeing a Hun scurrying for more efficient cover and
being brought down as he ran.

A rescue party quickly brought the wounded officer and corporal back
to the Tank.

"Bringin' 'em in, sergeant?" asked one of the men. "We're all best
outside, I'm thinking. They're bringing up the guns."

"By Jove, so they are!" exclaimed Alderhame. "Yes, outside every man
jack of you. We'll be having fifteen-pounder shells this way in half
a jiffey."

The operation of abandoning the landship was proceeded with. Sergeant
Alderhame was the last man to leave, having previously lit a fuse
that would lead to the complete destruction of the Tank. She had
played her part nobly, and her reward was destruction at the hands of
her crew.

Presently Ralph opened his eyes, to find himself being carried by
four of his men. Others were bearing the wounded corporal, while more
were carrying off one of the maxims. At the same moment the first of
the German shells burst a hundred yards to the rear and within a few
feet of the already doomed landship.

"Where are you making for, sergeant?" asked Ralph.

"For that farmhouse, sir," replied Alderhame.

"Better not," protested the wounded subaltern, as resolutely as his
bodily weakness permitted. "They'll mark us down for a dead cert if
we take up our position there. Select a spot at least two hundred
yards away."

The crew of the Tank proceeded on their quest for shelter.
Instinctively they realized that they were in a very tight corner,
isolated on hostile ground. Nothing short of a miracle, they decided,
could extricate them from their dangerous position; yet with
unfailing resolution they made up their minds to "fight it out."
Death with their faces to the foe was infinitely preferable to the
horrors of the life of a prisoner of war in the hands of the Huns.

Keeping to the scanty cover afforded by a slight dip in the ground
the dauntless men made their way with the utmost caution. Just as
they gained the spot indicated by the officer a crash, completely
outvoicing the bursting of the shells, announced that Setley's Tank
was no longer in existence.

Propped against a shattered tree-trunk Ralph directed operations for
defence, while one of his men attended to his wound.

"Where's the German officer?" he asked suddenly.

Ginger Anderson, who was lying close to his disabled officer, grinned
broadly, despite the agony caused by his badly fractured leg.

"I 'it 'im a little too 'ard, sir," he explained. "Meant ter put 'im
to sleep in the best perfessional manner, but----"

"He was as dead as a doornail before you left to destroy the bridge,
sir," reported Sergeant Alderhame. "We didn't worry to bring his
carcase away, and I guess it will be a warning to his pals when they
find him. Hullo, sir! You're right. Fritz has started to shell the
farmhouse."

Evidently under the impression that the men from the Tank had
sheltered in the building the Huns began shelling the conspicuous
target. At the third round the place collapsed like a pack of cards.

"If they let it go at that we may even yet have a chance," thought
Ralph.

Ten minutes later Alderhame reported a considerable body of Germans
coming in the direction of the demolished house, while at the same
time the presence of a strong force of hostile infantry was seen
between the Tank's crew and the British front.

"No chance of slipping through," decided the sergeant. "We'll lie
close and trust to luck. They may not spot us. If they get too
curious we'll give them something to remember."

The Germans, on arriving at the site of the farm buildings, carefully
examined the debris. Disappointed in their expectations of finding
the bodies of their foes they signalled to the main force. The
receipt of this intelligence was followed by an encircling movement,
two battalions working round to the right, one to the left, while a
regiment of Jagers in extended order advanced immediately on their
front.

"They're mighty keen on getting us," said Ralph. "A couple of
thousand men at the very least."

About fifty of the Huns who had made their way to the farmhouse were
now heading directly for the spot where the British soldiers lay in
their scanty cover. It was impossible to escape detection.

"Stand by," whispered Alderhame tersely. He had taken over the
command, since Setley was too weak to direct operations effectively.

A guttural shout from one of the leading Germans proclaimed the fact
that he had spotted the group of khaki-clad men. A regular fusillade
was the immediate outcome of his discovery; but, with the usual
indifferent marksmanship of the Hun, the shots flew either wide or
else too high.

The maxim, aided by rifle fire, gave the enemy a very unpleasant
surprise, and before the first belt of ammunition was exhausted the
Germans were bolting for cover.

"Now for a good old shelling," thought Ralph.

But he was mistaken. For some unexplained reason the German field
guns had limbered up. Perhaps their presence was urgently required at
another point. Instead, the swarm of infantry began to converge upon
the isolated handful of Britons, until the position was surrounded by
a dense mass of field grey-clad troops.

Even then the Huns forbore to close. Sharpshooters crept forward,
taking admirable cover, but, generally speaking, the enemy kept
beyond effective rifle distance.

"They're going to wait until its dark and then rush us," decided
Alderhame. "By Jove, I never before played to such a crowded audience
as this!"

Slowly the time dragged on. Bullets from the skirmishers buzzed
incessantly over the defenders' heads. The crew of the Tank replied
leisurely, hardly ever throwing away a shot. The maxim was silent. It
was no use wasting ammunition on individual foes.

With disconcerting persistence, despite their losses, the Jagers drew
nearer and nearer. Numbers of them concentrated in a hollow within
eighty yards of the defenders' position, where, immune from fire,
they prepared to rush the little band at the point of the bayonet,
aided by the use of bombs.

Suddenly disorder appeared in the hostile ranks. Men, bolting for
cover, fled for dear life, many of them dropping from a fire more
intense than that of Setley's party.

The reason was soon apparent. Waddling over the undulating ground was
a British Tank. Spitting out fire as she advanced the rescuing
landship made straight for the place where the crew of her destroyed
consort held their own, and, taking up a position so as to form a
screen from the Germans' fire, she came to a stop.

"Buck up, Setley!" exclaimed Danvers. "Don't keep us waiting. Here's
plenty of room inside."

But Setley was temporarily beyond the "bucking up" stage. He had
fainted again.

When he recovered consciousness Ralph was in a base hospital. Almost
the first question he asked was whether his men were safe. Receiving
an affirmative reply, he enquired whether the nature of his wounds
would put him out of the running for active service.

"Bless my soul, no!" replied the doctor. "A few months at home and
you'll be as fit as a fiddle. Let me be the first to congratulate
you, Mr. Setley."

"On what?" asked Ralph.

"Promotion and the D.S.O.," replied the medico. "Both well earned,
let me say. Now, don't get excited, or you'll put yourself back. The
sooner you get fit the sooner you'll be given the command of one of
the latest super-Tanks. I know that for a fact."

"That's good," murmured the wounded lieutenant. "All I hope is that
when the Greatest Push comes off I'll again be to the Fore with the
Tanks!"



PRINTED BY
WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD.
PLYMOUTH, ENGLAND




  [Transcriber's Notes:

    A probable misprint, which was not corrected, is:

      [said Sefton] -> [said Setley]

    Nowhere else in the book the name [Sefton] is used.
    And the dialog where this occurs, implies  that this
    must be [Setley].

    In the paper version, used to make this digital text, there
    is a page (page no. 168, chapter XVI) where the text was
    damaged to such an extent that it was unreadable. The area
    covered five lines. On those lines the first words were
    corrupted. These pieces are marked in this text with
    [unreadable text].

    A few cases of punctuation errors were corrected, but are
    not mentioned here.
  ]





End of Project Gutenberg's To The Fore With the Tanks!, by Percy F. Westerman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TO THE FORE WITH THE TANKS! ***

***** This file should be named 51332-0.txt or 51332-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/3/3/51332/

Produced by R.G.P.M. van Giesen
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

