The Project Gutenberg EBook of La plainte d'une amante, by 
William Shakespeare, 1564-1616

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: La plainte d'une amante

Author: William Shakespeare, 1564-1616

Translator: François Pierre Guillaume Guizot, 1787-1874

Release Date: October 3, 2008 [EBook #26758]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA PLAINTE D'UNE AMANTE ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Rénald Lévesque and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr)







           Note du transcripteur.
           ===============================================
           Ce document est tiré de:

           OEUVRES COMPLÈTES DE
           SHAKSPEARE

           TRADUCTION DE
           M. GUIZOT

           NOUVELLE ÉDITION ENTIÈREMENT REVUE
           AVEC UNE ÉTUDE SUR SHAKSPEARE
           DES NOTICES SUR CHAQUE PIÈCE ET DES NOTES.

           Volume 8
           La vie et la mort du roi Richard III
           Le roi Henri VIII.--Titus Andronicus
           POEMES ET SONNETS:
           Vénus et Adonis.--La mort de Lucrèce
           La plainte d'une amante
           Le Pèlerin amoureux.--Sonnets.

           PARIS
           A LA LIBRAIRIE ACADÉMIQUE
           DIDIER ET Cie, LIBRAIRES-ÉDITEURS
           35, QUAI DES AUGUSTINS
           1863
           =================================================




                       LA PLAINTE D'UNE AMANTE

                                POËME.


I.--Sur le penchant d'une colline dont le sein creusé répétait une
lamentable histoire qui partait de la vallée voisine, je résolus
d'écouter cette double voix, et je m'étendis sur le sol pour prêter
l'oreille à cette triste aventure: bientôt je vis paraître une jeune
fille, d'une extrême pâleur: elle déchirait des papiers, elle brisait
des bagues, elle accablait l'univers de la pluie et du vent de sa
douleur.

II.--Sur sa tête elle portait une ruche tressée de paille, qui abritait
son visage du soleil; à travers la paille on pouvait croire qu'on
entrevoyait les restes d'une beauté perdue et évanouie. Le Temps n'avait
pas moissonné de sa faux tout ce que la jeunesse avait commencé, la
jeunesse n'avait pas non plus tout à fait disparu; et en dépit de la
rage cruelle du ciel, on apercevait encore quelque beauté à travers les
fentes de sa vie consumée.

III.--Souvent elle portait à ses yeux son mouchoir, qui était couvert de
dessins fantastiques; elle trempait les images soyeuses dans l'onde
amère que sa profonde douleur faisait couler en larmes, et souvent elle
lisait les lettres que portait le mouchoir: souvent aussi elle poussait
des cris inintelligibles et lamentables, tantôt exhalant sa douleur à
haute voix, et tantôt murmurant tout bas.

IV.--Parfois elle levait fixement les yeux comme si elle voulait lancer
des traits à la sphère céleste; parfois elle les tenait tristement
attachés à la terre: elle regardait tout droit devant elle, ou bien elle
les promenait autour d'elle, sans les arrêter nulle part: ses regards et
son âme étaient dans un désordre semblable.

V.--Ses cheveux, qui n'étaient ni épars, ni rattachés on tresses,
dénotaient en elle la négligence et l'absence d'orgueil: les uns
tombaient hors de son chapeau de paille et pendaient le long de sa joue
pâle et amaigrie: les autres restaient cachés dans son filet, et, soumis
à l'esclavage, ne cherchaient pas à y échapper, quoique mollement
tressés par une main négligente. Elle tira un millier de rubans d'un
panier orné d'ambre, de cristal et de jais: elle les jeta un à un dans
une rivière, sur la rive larmoyante de laquelle elle s'était assise;
comme l'usure, qui ajoute les pleurs aux pleurs, ou comme les mains d'un
monarque, qui ne dispensent pas leurs dons là où la misère demande
«quelque chose,» mais là où l'excès réclame tout.

VI.--Elle avait une foule de lettres pliées; elle les relut, soupira,
les déchira et les livra au cours de l'onde; elle brisa plus d'une bague
d'or et d'émail fleuri, leur ordonnant de chercher un sépulcre dans la
vase: elle trouva encore des lettres tristement écrites avec du sang,
cachetées avec de la soie qui les entourait, et soigneusement défendues
contre les regards curieux.

VII.--Elle les baigna souvent de ses larmes abondantes, elle les
embrassa souvent, et souvent aussi elle parut sur le point de les mettre
en pièces; elle s'écria: «O sang trompeur! ô toi, écrivain de mensonge,
quel terrible témoignage ne rends-tu pas? L'encre semblerait ici plus
noire et plus criminelle!» Cela dit, elle déchire dans sa rage les
lignes, et sa fureur les réduit en mille fragments. Un homme vénérable
qui faisait paître son troupeau; homme jadis lancé dans le monde, qui
connaissait bien le tourbillon de la cour et de la ville, et qui avait
laissé couler les heures rapides, en observant leur marche, vint trouver
cette pauvre âme affligée, et grâce au privilège de son âge, il lui
demanda de lui dire en peu de mots la cause et les motifs de son
chagrin.

VIII.--Il s'appuie sur son bâton noueux et vient doucement s'asseoir à
ses côtés; puis une fois près d'elle, il lui demande de nouveau de
confier à son oreille la cause de son affliction; s'il peut trouver un
remède qui apporte quelque soulagement à l'excès de sa douleur, il le
lui promet avec la charité d'un vieillard.

IX.--«Mon père, dit-elle, quoique vous voyiez en moi les ravages qu'ont
fait pins d'une heure d'angoisse, ne croyez pas que je sois vieille;
c'est le chagrin, et non l'âge, qui a eu sur moi cet empire: je pourrais
être encore une fleur qui s'épanouit dans toute sa fraîcheur, si j'avais
su n'aimer que moi, et me refuser à tout autre amour. Mais hélas! je
prêtai trop tôt l'oreille aux prières (faites pour gagner mon coeur)
d'un être si richement doué par la nature à l'extérieur, que les yeux
des jeunes filles ne pouvaient se détacher de son visage l'amour n'avait
pas de demeure; il vint se fixer chez lui, et lorsqu'il fut installé
dans ce corps si beau, il devint doublement divin.

X.--«Ses cheveux brunissants tombaient en boucles ondoyantes, et chaque
léger souffle du vent pressait sur ses lèvres leurs masses soyeuses. Ce
qui est doux à faire trouve facilement à se faire; tous les regards
étaient charmés en le contemplant, car on retrouvait en petit, sur son
visage, ce qui fut jadis abondamment semé dans le paradis.

XI.--«La virilité ne paraissait encore guère sur son visage: son duvet
de phénix commençait seulement à se montrer, comme du velours encore
inégal, sur cette peau incomparable, dont la finesse surpassait le tissu
qu'elle semblait porter; cependant son visage en paraissait encore plus
précieux, et la tendre affection hésitait à prononcer s'il était plus
beau avec ou sans cette parure.

XII.--«Ses qualités égalaient sa beauté, car il avait la langue aussi
douce et aussi rapide qu'une jeune fille: et cependant, si les hommes
l'irritaient, il devenait furieux comme les ouragans qui se déchaînent
entre mai et avril, quand le vent souffle doucement, quoiqu'il puisse
revêtir une extrême violence. Sa jeunesse et sa fougue recouvraient ce
mensonge de l'orgueil de la vérité.

XIII.--«Comme il montait à cheval! Souvent les hommes disent que le
coursier prend son ardeur de son cavalier: impatient de porter le joug,
noble dans sa soumission, quels détours, quels bonds, quelles courses,
quels arrêts il savait faire! Ici l'on se demandait si le cheval
devenait sa créature, ou s'il se laissait gouverner par son admirable
coursier.

XIV.--«Mais bientôt la réponse était trouvée; sa grâce naturelle donnait
de la vie et du charme à tout ce qui lui appartenait et aux ornements:
il était accompli en tout par lui-même, et n'avait pas besoin d'une
parure extérieure: tout ce qu'il ajoutait à sa beauté devenait plus beau
en étant près de lui; les objets les plus élégants n'ajoutaient pas à sa
grâce, mais acquéraient de la grâce en l'approchant.

XV.--«Sa langue pleine d'autorité savait faire usage de toute espèce
d'arguments et de questions profondes, de promptes répliques et de
raisonnements puissants; il savait les faire naître et les assoupir; il
savait faire rire les coeurs tristes et faire pleurer les esprits
joyeux; il avait les talents divers et l'habileté de savoir parler à
toutes les passions dans son adroite volonté.

XVI.--«Il régnait dans le coeur de tous, des jeunes comme des vieux; et
les deux sexes, également charmés, demeuraient avec lui par la pensée,
ou restaient autour de lui, le suivant partout où il allait. Avant qu'il
exprimât un désir, ce désir lui était accordé; on lui insinuait ce qu'il
voulait demander; et ceux qui avaient une volonté faisaient obéir leur
volonté à la sienne.

XVII.--«Bien des gens se procuraient son portrait pour charmer leurs
yeux et prendre possession de leur âme: semblables aux insensés qui
voient dans leur imagination des objets splendides, qui s'attribuent par
la pensée des domaines et des palais, et qui en jouissent bien plus que
le seigneur goutteux qui les possède réellement.

XVIII.--«Plus d'une femme qui n'avait jamais touché sa main se croyait
de la sorte maîtresse de son coeur, et moi, pauvre infortunée, qui
jouissais de ma liberté, et qui étais ma libre propriété, je fus charmée
par sa jeune adresse, et par son adroite jeunesse; je livrai mon coeur à
sa puissance enchanteresse; je ne me réservai que la tige, et je lui
donnai toute ma fleur.

XIX.--«Cependant je ne fis pas comme quelques-unes de mes pareilles, je
n'allais pas le chercher, je ne désirai pas de lui céder: je compris que
mon honneur me le défendait, et j'abritai mon honneur en restant à
distance. L'expérience me construisit des remparts propres à me mettre à
l'abri de ses causes, à déjouer ce bijou trompeur et sa furie amoureuse.

XX.--«Mais, hélas! qui a jamais pu, au moyen de l'expérience passée,
éviter les maux qu'il faut souffrir? Qui a jamais su, contre sa propre
volonté, se détourner des périls du chemin? La prudence peut arrêter un
moment ce qu'elle ne peut empêcher à jamais; car lorsque nous nous
emportons, les conseils ne font souvent que nous irriter, en voulant
nous rendre plus sages.

XXI.--«Ce n'est pas donner satisfaction à notre passion que de nous dire
qu'il faut la dompter, et de nous défendre des biens qui nous semblent
si charmants, par crainte des maux qui prêchent à notre profit. O désir,
reste éloigné du bon jugement! L'un a un palais qui veut à toute force
goûter ce qui est bon, quoique la raison pleure et s'écrie: «C'est ta
dernière heure.»

XXII.--«Car j'aurais pu dire: «Cet homme est trompeur»; je connaissais
les formes qu'empruntait sa perfide astuce; je savais où ses plantes
croissaient dans les vergers d'autrui; j'avais vu comment il savait
dorer d'un sourire tous ses mensonges, je savais comment il pouvait
enfreindre ses voeux, je croyais que ses actions et ses paroles
n'étaient que l'effet de l'art, et les oeuvres bâtardes de son coeur
pervers.

XXIII.--«Longtemps je restai maîtresse de ma place, jusqu'à ce qu'enfin
il m'assiégea en disant: «Douce fille, ayez quelque compassion de ma
jeunesse souffrante, et ne soyez pas effrayée de mes saints voeux; ce
que je vous jure, je ne l'ai jamais dit à personne; car j'ai été souvent
convoqué à des festins d'amour, mais jusqu'à présent, je n'ai jamais
invité personne, je n'ai jamais prononcé de serment.

XXIV.--«Toutes mes fautes, dont vous avez pu entendre parler au loin,
sont des erreurs du sang, et non de l'esprit; l'amour n'en est pas
coupable: elles ont pu être commises là où l'on n'était ni fidèle ni
tendre: elles ont tellement cherché la honte qu'elles ont fini par la
trouver; et je suis d'autant moins à blâmer qu'elles cherchent davantage
à faire peser sur moi toute la honte.

XXV.--«Parmi toutes celles que mes yeux ont vues, il n'y en a pas une
seule dont la flamme ait le moins du monde échauffé mon coeur, qui m'ait
causé le plus léger chagrin, ou qui ait charmé un seul instant mes
loisirs: je leur ai fait du mal, mais elles ne m'en ont jamais fait:
leur coeur m'était soumis, mais le mien était libre, et régnait en
souverain dans sa monarchie.

XXVI.--«Voyez quels tributs ces coeurs malades m'envoyaient: des perles
pâlissantes, et des rubis rouges comme le sang; elles se figuraient
qu'elles me prêtaient en même temps leurs douleurs et leurs rougeurs
passionnées, peintes sous cet emblème d'une blancheur éclatante et d'une
nuance cramoisie: résultats d'une terreur et d'une douce modestie qui
résidaient dans leurs coeurs, mais qui paraissaient extérieurement.

XXVII.--«Et voyez ces objets précieux, ces cheveux tendrement mêlés à de
riches métaux; j'en ai reçu de plus d'une beauté qui me suppliait en
pleurant de daigner les accepter, avec de splendides bijoux, et des
sonnets recherchés où l'on faisait valoir la nature, la valeur et la
qualité de chaque pierre précieuse.

XXVIII.--«Le diamant était beau et dur, et il contenait mille beautés
cachées: l'émeraude vert foncé, où les yeux affaiblis reposent leur
éclat maladif: le saphir couleur du ciel, et l'opale qui resplendit de
tant d'objets divers: chacune de ces pierres, bien enchâssée d'esprit,
souriait ou faisait pleurer.

XXIX.--«Regardez tous ces trophées d'affections brûlantes, hommage de
désirs pensifs et soumis: la nature m'ordonne de ne pas les entasser en
avare, mais de les donner à celle qui m'a dompté. C'est à vous, mon
origine et ma fin. Ces oblations sont nécessairement à vous, puisque
vous êtes ma patronne, à moi qui suis leur autel.

XXX.--«Avancez donc cette main qu'aucune phrase ne saurait louer, cette
main dont la blancheur fait pencher la balance éthérée de l'éloge:
disposez de toutes ces images sanctifiées par des soupirs que poussaient
jadis des coeurs ardents; moi, qui suis votre serviteur pour vous obéir
et travailler sous vos ordres, je vous remets ces paquets divers que
j'ai réunis.

XXXI.--«Voici, cet objet charmant me vient d'une nonne, ou d'une sainte
soeur de la plus pure renommée: jadis elle fuyait à la cour les nobles
qui la recherchaient, elle dont les talents si rares charmaient la fleur
de la chevalerie: les plus brillants esprits lui adressaient leurs
hommages, mais elle restait froide et silencieuse, et elle a fini par
s'éloigner pour passer sa vie au sein de l'amour éternel.

XXXII.--«Mais, ô ma chérie, est-il pénible de quitter ce que nous
n'avons pas, et de vaincre ce qui ne résiste pas? Est-il difficile de
barricader une citadelle qui n'a-point d'assaillant et de se jouer dans
des entraves à peine serrées? Celle qui cherche ainsi à assurer sa
renommée se met par la fuite à l'abri de toute créature; elle se montre
vaillante par son absence, non par son courage.

XXXIII.--«O pardonne-moi, mais j'ai le droit de me vanter; l'accident
qui m'amena devant elle fut en un instant vainqueur de toute son
énergie: elle voudrait fuir le cloître où elle est emprisonnée; l'amour
religieux a éteint la flamme de la religion; elle a voulu être murée
pour fuir la tentation, et maintenant elle voudrait la liberté pour
pouvoir être tentée.

XXXIV.--«O laissez-moi vous dire combien vous êtes puissante! Les coeurs
brisés qui m'appartiennent ont vidé dans mon puits toutes leurs
fontaines, et je répands le mien dans votre Océan. J'ai été plus fort
qu'elle, et vous êtes plus forte que moi, réunissez-nous tous ensemble
pour votre victoire, et que ce remède soit salutaire pour votre coeur
glacé.

XXXV.--«J'ai eu le pouvoir de charmer un soleil sacré, discipliné et
apaisé par la grâce: il crut que ses yeux triompheraient en donnant
l'assaut, et que tous les voeux lui céderaient la place. O Amour
tout-puissant: ni les voeux, ni les liens, ni l'espace ne peuvent te
combattre; ils n'ont ni aiguillon, ni force, ni puissance. Tu es tout,
et toutes choses sont à toi.

XXXVI.--«Lorsque tu agis, que font les préceptes des exemples vieillis?
Lorsque tu enflammes, combien la richesse, la crainte filiale, la loi,
la famille, la renommée sont de faibles obstacles: les armes de l'Amour
sont pacifiques, mais elles triomphent de toute règle, de tout jugement,
de toute honte; il adoucit, dans les angoisses qu'il cause, l'aiguillon
de la force, de la crainte et de la douleur.

XXXVII.--«Voici, tous ces coeurs qui sont soumis au mien sentent qu'ils
se brisent, et languissent avec de sanglants gémissements; c'est vers
vous qu'ils tournent leurs soupirs, afin que vous renonciez à me faire
soupirer, afin que vous prêtiez doucement l'oreille à mes tendres
desseins, et que vous ajoutiez foi à ce puissant serment qui accompagne
mon hommage.»

XXXVIII.--«Après avoir ainsi parlé, il baissa ses yeux humides, qu'il
avait jusqu'alors tenus attachés sur mon visage; un fleuve au courant
écumeux coula tendrement de ses yeux. O quel charme le canal prêtait au
fleuve! son cristal éblouissant répétait à travers l'onde les roses
éclatantes qui lui prêtaient leur couleur.

XXXIX.--.«O mon père, quel enfer de puissance magique réside dans le
petit globe d'une seule larme! Quel est le coeur de rocher qui peut
résister à l'inondation des yeux? Quel est le sein glacé qui n'en serait
réchauffé? O effet singulier! froide modestie, ardente colère, vous êtes
à la fois enflammée et glacée.

XL.--«Car voici! Sa passion, qui n'était que le comble de l'art, sut
bien vite faire fondre en larmes ma raison: j'abandonnai ma blanche robe
de chasteté, je dépouillai ma prudente réserve et mes craintes modestes;
je me montrai à lui, comme il se montrait à moi, tout en larmes;
seulement nos larmes avaient cette différence, c'est que les siennes
m'empoisonnèrent, et que les miennes le rendirent à la vie.

XLI.--«Chez lui, la richesse de l'adresse subtile s'appliquait à tromper
sans cesse, et prenait mille formes bizarres; tantôt des rougeurs
brûlantes, tantôt des torrents de larmes, ou des pâleurs mortelles; il
savait prendre et quitter à plaisir, suivant que cela devait mieux
tromper, et rougir des discours grossiers, et pleurer sur les douleurs
d'autrui, et pâlir, et s'évanouir en présence de scènes émouvantes.

XLII.--«Parmi tous les coeurs qui étaient à sa portée il n'en était pas
un seul qui pût échapper à ses coups meurtriers, lorsqu'il se montrait à
la fois tendre et soumis; couvert de ces voiles, il triomphait de toutes
celles qu'il voulait frapper. Plus il désirait une chose, et plus il
s'en montrait éloigné; quand l'ardente luxure enflammait son coeur, il
vantait la pureté virginale et célébrait la froide chasteté.

XLIII.--«C'était ainsi qu'il couvrait du vêtement d'une Grâce le démon
caché et nu, et que des coeurs sans expérience cédaient au tentateur qui
planait au-dessus d'eux comme un chérubin. Est-il une seule jeune fille,
encore simple et innocente, qui n'eût ainsi succombé? Hélas! je
succombai, et cependant je me demande ce que je ferais encore
aujourd'hui pour un si cher amour.

XLIV.--«Oh! l'humidité traîtresse de son regard, oh! le feu trompeur qui
brillait sur son visage, oh! l'éclair mensonger qui semblait partir de
son coeur, oh! les tristes soupirs qu'exhalait sa poitrine oppressée,
oh! toute cette émotion feinte, qui semblait si naturelle, tromperaient
encore aujourd'hui celle qui s'est déjà laissé tromper, et la jeune
fille pardonnée succomberait de nouveau.»










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of La plainte d'une amante, by 
William Shakespeare, 1564-1616

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA PLAINTE D'UNE AMANTE ***

***** This file should be named 26758-8.txt or 26758-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/7/5/26758/

Produced by Paul Murray, Rénald Lévesque and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
